2
3
First Published in 2013 by Victory Belt Publishing Inc.
Copyright © 2013 Kelly Starrett and Glen Cordoza
All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, or stored in a database or
retrieval system, without prior written permission from the publisher.
ISBN 13: 978-1-936608-15-7
This book is for educational purposes. The publisher and authors of this
instructional book are not responsible in any manner whatsoever for any
adverse effects arising directly or indirectly as a result of the information
provided in this book. If not practiced safely and with caution, working
out can be dangerous to you and to others. It is important to consult with
a professional fitness instructor before beginning training. It is also very
important to consult with a physician prior to training due to the intense
and strenuous nature of the techniques in this book.
RRD 03-13




                                     4
           TABLE OF CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION
A New Human-Performance Epoch
How to Use This Book
CHAPTER 1 THE MOVEMENT AND MOBILITY SYSTEM
It’s About Performance
The Gym Is Your Lab
You Are an Amazing, Adaptable, Healing Machine
You Cannot Make Basic Adaptation Errors
CHAPTER 2 MIDLINE STABILIZATION AND ORGANIZATION
Three Reasons for Bracing Your Spine
The Bracing Sequence
The Two-Hand Rule
Braced-Neutral Standing Position
Braced-Neutral Sitting Position
Abdominal Tension
Breathing Mechanics
CHAPTER 3 ONE-JOINT RULE
Braced Spinal Extension and Flexion
Global Spinal Extension and Flexion
CHAPTER 4 LAWS OF TORQUE
The Two Laws of Torque
Torque Tests


                                 5
Shoulder-Stability Torque Tests
Hip-Stability Torque Tests
CHAPTER 5 MOVEMENT HIERARCHY
Skill Progressions and Movement Complexity
Category 1 Movements
Category 2 Movements
Category 3 Movements
Upright-Torso Demands
   CATEGORY 1 MOVEMENTS
    Air Squat
    Box Squat
    Back Squat
    Front Squat
    Overhead Squat
    Deadlift
    Pushup
    Ring-Pushup
    Bench Press
    Floor Press
    Dip
    Ring Dip
    Strict-Press
    Handstand Pushup
    Pull-Up
    Chin-Up
   CATEGORY 2 MOVEMENTS
    Wall Ball
    Push-Press
    Jumping and Landing
    Kettlebell Swing


                                  6
    One-Arm Swing
    Rowing
    Kipping Pull-Up
    Snatch Balance Progression
   CATEGORY 3 MOVEMENTS
    Burpee
    Turkish Getup
    Clean
    Power Clean
    Hang Clean
    Push-Jerk
    Snatch
    Muscle-Up
CHAPTER 6 THE TUNNEL
Identifying the Problem
CHAPTER 7 THE SYSTEMS
A Movement-Based Approach
The Mobility Systems
    Joint Mechanics
    Sliding Surface
    Muscle Dynamics
Mobilization Methods
    Pressure Wave
    Contract and Relax
    Banded Flossing
    Smash and Floss
    Paper-clipping (Oscillation)
    Voodoo Flossing (Compression)
    Flexion Gapping
Upstream and Downstream Approach

                                 7
Programming for Mobility
Rules of Mobility
Mobility Tools
   AREA 1: THORACIC SPINE (UPPER BACK, NECK,
   SCAPULA)
   AREA 2: POSTERIOR SHOULDER (LAT, POSTERIOR
   DELTOID)
   AREA 3: ANTERIOR SHOULDER (PEC, ANTERIOR DELTOID)
   AREA 4: DOWNSTREAM ARM (TRICEPS, ELBOWS,
   FOREARM, WRIST)
   AREA 5: TRUNK (PSOAS, LOW BACK, OBLIQUE)
   AREA 6: POSTERIOR HIGH CHAIN (GLUTES, HIP CAPSULE)
   AREA 7: ANTERIOR HIGH CHAIN (HIP FLEXOR,
   QUADRICEPS)
   AREA 8: MEDIAL CHAIN (ADDUCTOR)
   AREA 9: POSTERIOR CHAIN (HAMSTRING)
   AREA 10: KNEE
   AREA 11: MEDIAL AND ANTERIOR SHIN
   AREA 12: CALF
   AREA 13: ANKLE AND PLANTAR SURFACE
GLOSSARY
ABOUT THE AUTHORS




                           8
 This book is ultimately dedicated to my daughters, Georgia and
                             Caroline.
 This book is your primer. Go burn the world to the ground and
build a better one. Your secret mermaid names will always be safe
                             with me.




                               9
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




       10
11
    A little over two years ago, I sent back my signed copy of the
publishing contract for this book and realized it was time to wrestle what
I had in my head onto the printed page. I knew that wouldn’t be a walk in
the park, but what I really dreaded, even then, was the day I’d have to sit
down and begin the impossible task of trying to thank all of the people to
whom I owe a debt of gratitude. That day has come.
    One thing that many people don’t know about me is that I have a
strangely accurate memory for interpersonal interaction and events.
This means that I can recall most of the feelings, lessons, and
experiences that have come to shape the thinking behind Becoming a
Supple Leopard: The Ultimate Guide to Resolving Pain, Preventing
Injury, and Optimizing Athletic Performance. Apparently, I’m not alone. I
remember reading a story about what the great American discus
thrower Al Oerter said in his acceptance speech as he was being
inducted into the Track and Field Hall of Fame. If memory serves me
right, Mr. Oerter said, essentially, that every coach and training partner
he’d ever had should have been on the stage accepting the award with
him. He made it clear that he could never have achieved his
extraordinary career without the tens of thousands of mostly pedestrian
hours he and his coaches and training partners had spent together,
pushing and refining their training. I feel the same way about this book.
Certainly it draws on my personal experience, including my own athletic
success and failure. But it’s also the synthesis of thousands of
conversations and as many, if not more, hours spent learning with and
from others in training, competition, coaching, and graduate school.
Trying to whittle down all that experience and give proper and adequate
thanks is a little overwhelming.
    I often say that we are not the first people to have taken a real and
thoughtful crack at solving the problems that attend human movement
and performance. The difference is, I have had the benefit of living in this
age. Technology, in combination with a modern, classical, doctoral level
education in physiotherapy, has equipped me to create what I believe is

                                    12
a fresh, new, and integrated model for understanding and interpreting the
work of the thousands of brilliant physios and coaches who came before
me and who work around me. I had the foresight and good luck to open
one of the first fifty CrossFit gyms with my wife, Juliet. It has since
provided me with tens of thousands of practical hours in human
movement pattern recognition—something I could never have achieved
even a decade ago. (Ursul, we have worm-sign the likes of which even
god has never seen…)1 I remember reading the seminal textbook
Maitland’s Peripheral Manipulation when I was in the second year of my
doctoral program and having my mind blown: Someone had conceived
of an idea based on his study and clinical practice and integrated that
idea into a cohesive and cogent model. Now, nearly two years into the
process of writing this book, I can see the moment I felt like I had
something to say, a sort of “concept” inflection point. I hope this book
makes a significant contribution to the incredible bodies of work already
out there—and those to come.
    I should be frank. While it’s easy to say with certainty that I can
recall thinking I should write this book, it would never—and I mean
never—have happened without the confluence of two specific events and
two very special people. The first of these events is the regular trainer
course that I teach for CrossFit. Several times a month, I get to stand in
front of fifty or so extraordinary coaches and athletes from around the
world, each with a different background and story. These coaches and
athletes are fierce in their passions and brilliant in their capacity to seek
out and integrate better movement practices into their own training. They
are a ruthlessly experienced and inquisitive mob and every day that I
have the pleasure of teaching them is a bit of a trial by fire. There is no
place to hide. Every idea I teach must withstand clinical validation and
must be built on observable, measurable, and repeatable experience. If
not, I will be torn to pieces by wild dogs. What the thousands of
attendees don’t realize, of course, is that they are part of my own, large-
scale experiment. I never would have been ready to open my thinking to

                                     13
the larger world without their tacit support over this last half decade.
    Event two is the Mobility Project. In the fall of 2010, I made a
foolhardy commitment to film a video about position, mobility, and
human mechanics every day for a year. I don’t know the last time you
tried to perform a public creative act for 365 days in a row, but you have
to get really competent, quickly. With nearly 1.5 million unique users on
the site, the real time feedback is unmatched. There is no place to hide
on camera so you’d better be sure in your thinking lest the Internet
destroy you and expose you for a fraud.
    That said, this book would never have happened without the patience
and friendship of Glen Cordoza. For the last eighteen months, Glen
forced me to organize and clarify my thinking. He pressed me ruthlessly
to explain and simplify the complex processes of my practice and
coaching. It would have taken me another, oh, ten years to solidify my
thoughts without his constant questioning and unshakeable faith in me. I
actually believed that I could pull this book off by myself at one point.
Then I realized I didn’t even own a camera that wasn’t attached to my
phone. Sure I had some ideas about human movement and
performance, but I sure as hell didn’t know how to write a book about it.
Where some people have a weekend or go on vacation, I worked on the
book with Glen. He has become a confidant, brother, fellow
revolutionary, brother to my wife, and uncle to my children. I shudder to
think how much Glen has been exposed to my brain. I’m not sure he will
ever recover and I know I’ll never be able to repay him his effort or
friendship.
    And then there’s Jstar. As I’ve come to find out, writing any book is
an act of will and of hope. It’s like planting bulbs in the fall, hoping that
you’ll be around in the spring to see them bloom. During the long, dark,
wet winter, it’s really, really difficult to remember that you actually
planted the bulbs and that they actually might bloom into something
beautiful. From the first time I turned our home’s back office into a scene
from the movie A Beautiful Mind, my wife Juliet didn’t flinch. After a

                                     14
week balancing a life, the gym, my work travel, and our children, Juliet
would stoically pick up the additional slack that fell to her when I was
“working on the book.” The spine of this book should really just read
“Starretts.” If you are reading this, be sure to remember to email my
wife your thanks. Trust me, in a million ways, I could not have written a
single word without her steadfast stewardship, cheerleading, counsel,
keen eye, and hard work. I’d still be sleeping in a truck and selling
Kayaks somewhere in Colorado if Juliet hadn’t had the faith to plant a
few bulbs for the spring. The first flowers of this book are for her.
    There are a few really important coaches who influenced me. I
would be remiss if I did not mention Mike Burgener and Mark Rippetoe.
They spent a great deal of time with a hungry young kid seeking to
understand what they already knew. Coach Rip once answered the
phone when I called his gym and talked to me for thirty minutes about
how he thought the adductors worked in squatting. To this day, this
blows my mind and I always think of his kindness toward me when a
young coach comes to me wanting advice or guidance. Coach B is my
sensei. He has shown me that I need to be able to coach everyone, and
that my thinking has to work for everyone, from children to Olympians.
Thank you both.
    Greg Glassman and the incredible people behind the scenes at
CrossFit have created, supported, and nurtured literally thousands of
coaches. I am proud to call myself one of these. Greg created a template
that was broad and complete enough to leave room for my own thinking
and discovery. I will never be able to repay him, his faith in me, or his
incredible generosity. He challenged me to validate what I thought to be
true in the hard, cold light of observable, measurable, and repeatable
human function. I have often said it, but finding CrossFit and Greg’s
early writing was like discovering the unified field theory of human
performance. I had the good fortune to train at the original CrossFit
Santa Cruz when Greg was still coaching every day. His counsel—that
the most important research I could do was right there in front of me, in

                                   15
the athletes and coaches I was working with—continues to serve me
well. Greg’s work has forever changed my life and the lives of my
family. His thinking is at the core of this book.
     Thanks also go to:
     The coaches of SFCF: Tonya, Ty, Roop, Connie, Maggie, Kelsi,
Diane, Sean, John, Tuller, Bmack, Erin, Kristin, Courtney, Nate, Boz,
Kimmie, Patrick, Debbie, and Carl. I would be nothing without you guys.
POD.
     Tom and Lisa Wiscombe. They were vital in the production and
overall coolness of this work. I’m pretty sure they invented the
computational leopard. Their brilliance inspires me.
     Janet and Ed. From making the invisible visible, to lagging
indicators, your love and support make it possible for this family to
work. Thank you.
     TJ Murphy: Any creative project of this scale is like a miracle of
emergence, serendipity, and machine-like precision. Frankly, I can’t
imagine pulling this off without your humor, advocacy, and keen brain.
It’s like a butterfly flapped its wings somewhere and I ended up with you
on my team.
     Carl Paoli, Brian MacKenzie, John Welbourn, Jill Miller, Mark Bell
and Jesse Burdick. Every good coach I know has a few close friends
who can call bullshit, open doors, and make the journey worth it for each
other. The archetype of the monk-coach—someone working things out
by themselves in isolation—is total crap. I am surrounded by some of
the best thinkers and coaches on the planet. Don’t worry, guys: I’ll
happily smash your quads for life. Thanks for having my back.
     Mom and Don. I knew that I didn’t want to kayak forever. Sorry I
didn’t share that part of the plan with you right away. You were right;
grad school was a good choice. Knowing you guys are in my corner is
like having a formidable secret weapon.

   Kelly Starrett

                                   16
                  INTRODUCTION

     Often these days, I find myself crammed into an airplane seat on my
way across the country to work with athletes, coaches, professional
sports teams, CrossFit gyms, corporations, and elite military forces.
Inevitably I end up making small talk with the poor soul imprisoned next
to me. Soon enough I get the question: “What do you do for work?”
     Dozens of answers run through my head.
     “I make the best athletes in the world better.”
     “I work with the government to improve our military’s force
protection and force resiliency.”
     “I work with athletes and coaches to help them understand and
resolve common and preventable losses of torque, force, wattage, and
output.”
     “I’m trying to change the world’s movement-based economy from
subsistence tension-hunting to sustainable, high-yield torque farming.”
     “I’m fomenting revolution. I’m trying to empower people to live more
integrated, pain-free, self-actualized lives.”
     No, I don’t mention anything about farming torque or self-
actualization, which I’ll spend plenty of time on in the pages to come. I
keep it simple. “I’m a teacher,” I say.
     Typically eyes glaze over, and the conversation sputters to a halt.
But once in a while, my seatmate is curious enough to ask the obvious
follow-up—“What do you teach?”—unaware of the depths of my
obsession with human movement and performance, but he soon finds
out.
     What I teach—and what you will learn in this book—is a multi-
function, extraordinarily effective movement and mobility system. Learn,
practice, and apply it and you will understand how to move correctly in

                                   17
all situations. And I mean all. It will serve you at rest and when you are
executing a demanding physical feat—say, in the midst of an Olympic
competition, or in a strenuous combat or rescue operation.
     This is a strength-and-conditioning system that is also diagnostic in
nature: It can help you—or your coach—detect movement and
positioning errors even as it improves your performance and brings you
to the top of your game. My system gives you the tools to dissolve the
physical restrictions that prevent you from fully actualizing your
potential. With enough practice, you can develop yourself to the point at
which your full physical capabilities will be available to you
instantaneously. You will develop the motor-control and range-of-motion
to do anything at any time.
     You could ultimately become the human equivalent of a supple
leopard, always poised and ready for action.
     You might ask, “What does it mean to become a supple leopard?”
It’s a good question, one that warrants an explanation.
     I’ve long been fascinated with the idea of a leopard: powerful, fast,
adaptable, stealthy… badass.
     When I was fourteen I watched the movie Gallipoli with my dad. It’s
about two Australian sprinters who go off to fight in Turkey during World
War I. There’s a memorable scene at the beginning where Archy, a
rising track star, is being trained by his uncle Jack. The pep talk goes
like this:

   Jack: What are your legs?
   Archy: Springs. Steel Springs.
   Jack: What are they going to do?
   Archy: Hurl me down the track.
   Jack: How fast can you run?
   Archy: As fast as a leopard.
   Jack: How fast are you going to run?
   Archy: As fast as a leopard!

                                   18
   Jack: Then let’s see you do it!

     For whatever reason, the “fast as a leopard” mantra stuck with me.
But it wasn’t until a Navy SEAL buddy of mine said, “You know, Kelly, a
leopard never stretches,” that this notion of becoming a supple leopard
drifted into my consciousness.
     Of course a leopard doesn’t stretch! A leopard has full physical
capacity available at all times. It can attack and defend with full power at
any moment. Unlike humans, it doesn’t need to prep for movement. It
doesn’t need to activate its glutes; it doesn’t have to foam-roll; it doesn’t
have to raise its core temperature—it’s just ready.
     Obviously, we do not share the same physical playing field with
leopards. We have to warm-up for strenuous activities and practice and
ingrain good movement patterning. But that doesn’t mean we can’t be
working toward the goal of having full physical capabilities available to
us instantaneously, or having the motor-control and the range-of-motion
to perform any physical feat at any time. Leopards don’t have to work at
being supple; they naturally are. But people are brutally tight and missing
key ranges of motion that prevent them from moving as pliantly and
powerfully as a leopard.
     Metaphorically speaking, if you want to become a supple leopard,
you need to understand how to move correctly in every situation. You
also need the tools to deal with stiff and adaptively short tissues that
restrict range-of-motion. This is the basis of my Movement and Mobility
System.


A New Human-Performance Epoch
    Is what I teach radically new? Yes, and then again, no.
    I see myself as one of the latest in a long line of teachers concerned
with organizing and optimizing movement to maximize physical
performance—consistently and without injury.

                                     19
      Certainly, human beings have explored this for eons. In fact, I’ve
seen a thousand-year-old image on a coin that shows a man sitting in
full lotus—a posture that creates more stability for the spinal system.
More recently, some three hundred and fifty years ago, a famous
Japanese swordsman, Miyamoto Musashi, wrote about the importance
of keeping your belly firm and your knees and feet in a good position:
“Make your combat stance your everyday stance.” It is strange yet
perfect advice from Musashi’s famous text, The Book of Five Rings.
      What’s exciting about being alive today is that we’re in the midst of a
human-performance epoch. Physical mastery is not limited to the few.
As I see it, we are experiencing a quantum leap in the quality,
reproducibility, and ubiquity of absolute human physical potential. In fact,
if we imagine the peak expression of human potential to be some kind of
golden ratio, then the current generation of coaches, athletes, and
thinkers have achieved the equivalent of a Fibonacci jump at light speed.
      It’s crazy. I mean, even my mother is gluten-free and casually brags
about her latest deadlift personal record.
      What’s going on? What’s so different about the time in which we
live?
      What’s different is that we’ve seen a convergence of factors create a
new golden age in human physical performance. Four key factors are
responsible.
      First, the advent of the Internet and modern media has enabled the
sharing of ideas globally. Isolated pockets of embodied knowledge are
more easily transferred and shared. Ten years ago, finding an Olympic-
lifting coach required bloodhound-like determination or luck. Most likely
both. Now the clean and snatch—the two core Olympic-lifting
movements—are widespread practices.
      Second, for the first time in the modern training era, there is an
unparalleled cross-discipline exchange among training practices and
theories of human movement. For example, our gym, San Francisco
CrossFit, is an interdisciplinary melting pot: physiotherapists hang out

                                     20
with elite powerlifters, Olympic-lifting medalists talk to champion
gymnasts, and ballet dancers train with elite endurance coaches. This
phenomenon is the strength-and-conditioning equivalent of the great
systems theorist Buckminster Fuller’s concept of mutual
accommodation: that correctly organized, functionally sound systems
are never in opposition. They mutually support one another.




                                  21
     Everyone shares the same basic design and body structure.
People’s shoulders all work the same way: the principles that govern a
stable shoulder position while vaulting in gymnastics are the same in the
bench press; how you organize your shoulders to sit in lotus posture
while meditating is the same way you organize them when working at
your computer. It’s just that the same set of problems have been solved
from radically different angles and approaches. Until now.
     Third, we appear to be living at a time when there is growing interest
in the body. While this topic probably merits its own book, there can be
no doubt that the accessibility of online and mobile tools that make it
possible to measure our behavior—as well as our lifestyle, nutrition, and
exercise habits—has shifted the responsibility for keeping our bodies in
the best shape possible back where it belongs: on the individual.
     Elite and recreational athletes alike can track and measure nearly
any aspect of their performance and biology with little effort and cost.

                                    22
Want to know how that afternoon coffee affects your sleep quality? No
problem. Want to fractionate your cholesterol and find out if you are
eating too much bacon? No problem (although I’m pretty sure that it’s
impossible to eat too much bacon). Whether people are tracking their
own blood chemistry or daily step totals, or trying to get to the root of
their own knee pain, there has been an enormous shift in consciousness,
leading to a greater sense of self-control. Eating, sleeping, and moving
correctly are not gimmicks or fads. The dam has burst and the personal
biological revolution is here.
     It’s a brave new world. We don’t have to wait decades or endure
multiple knee surgeries and heart attacks to find out that we’re running
poorly, eating poorly, sleeping poorly, and training poorly. Peter Drucker
—world-renowned management consultant, educator, and author—was
right, “What gets measured, gets managed.”
     The fourth factor contributing to this golden age is the evolution of
strength-and-conditioning. People have been lifting heavy weights,
moving quickly, and working very hard to real effect for some time. The
difference now is that a good strength-and-conditioning program has all
of the elements of human movement covered. That is, an intelligently
structured strength-and-conditioning program gives the athlete full
range-of-motion in his joints, limbs, and tissues; the motor-control to
express those ranges; and the ability to do so under actual physical load,
metabolic demand, cardio-respiratory demand, speed, and stress.
Couple this complete physical paradigm (the CrossFit model holds that
people should look and train like Olympic-lifting-sprinter-gymnasts, for
example) with the number of people now using a common language of
movements and movement paradigms, and you have the largest-scale
model experiment in human movement in the history of the world.
     Let’s put this in perspective. In the seven years our gym, San
Francisco CrossFit, has been open, we estimate that we’ve facilitated
nearly seventy thousand athlete training sessions. The sheer volume of
pattern recognition this is capable of generating is staggering and could

                                   23
take a clinician or a coach a lifetime to accumulate. Now multiply this by
thousands of locations, across hundreds of sports platforms, and
suddenly a simple strength-and-conditioning system also becomes the
world’s most potent diagnostic tool with unmatched test and retest
capabilities. This accumulated wisdom is what has given rise to my
system. The gym is suddenly the laboratory.
    We are able to eliminate correlates for human movement and
performance and replace them with actual human movement. You don’t
have to demonstrate an active straight-leg raise (a common physical-
therapist tool for assessing hamstring range-of-motion); you just need to
demonstrate that you can pick something up off the ground while keeping
your spine organized and flat (in other words, a deadlift). This is how
you bring it down to the bare essentials.
    Realize what a huge shift in thinking this is.
    Our previous model of strength-and-conditioning was predicated on
the fact that if you were just stronger and fitter, you’d be a better athlete
and better at your chosen sport. Clearly, that’s not true. In fact, anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL) injury rates in children continue to increase.
Running injury rates are estimated to be as high as 70 percent in some
studies. And therein lies the problem.
    In the past, it has been difficult to understand the nuances of poor
technique and biomechanics as expressed by athletes. Anecdotally,
basketball is the most dangerous sport a middle-aged man can play.
Why do middle-aged guys so readily tear their Achilles playing pickup
B-ball? Because it’s hard to see the underlying poor movement patterns
while they’re playing. They’re changing shapes, transitioning from one
position to another at high speeds.
    To prevent these injuries, we need a tool to make the invisible
visible. We need to bring athletes into the lab (i.e., the gym) to assess
their movement patterns before the catastrophe occurs—an ACL tear,
herniated disk, or torn rotator cuff. In addition, we need a model that
allows us to identify the problem, be it motor-control or biomechanical in

                                     24
origin.
     By consistently and systematically exposing athletes to the rigors of
full-range movements and optimal human motor-control, we’re able to
quickly identify force leaks, torque dumps, bad technique, motor
inefficiency, poorly integrated movement patterns; holes in strength,
speed, and metabolic conditioning; and restrictions in mobility. Best of
all, the tool we use to detect and prevent injury is the same tool needed
to improve an athlete’s performance. The middle-aged “tore my heel
cord” syndrome is a lot less likely to happen if an athlete’s ankle is
regularly exposed to full ranges of motion in movements like pistols or
overhead squats (see here).
     But there’s even more to it than that. This complete and modern
strength-and-conditioning system has not only become the most
complete way to systematically test and retest athletic performance, and
to diagnose movement inefficiencies and dysfunction; it has also created
a formal, universal language of human movement. In short, if you
understand the principles that govern full-range strength-and-
conditioning exercises and can apply them in this low-risk environment
(like a gym), you understand and can apply them to the activities and
positions of life, sports, dance, combat, and play.
     Take the squat for example. Squatting isn’t just a movement
performed in the gym; it’s how human beings lower their center of
gravity. A full-range squat (with hips below the knee crease) with loads
overhead, in the front of the torso, on the back, or on one leg pretty much
covers the human range of squatting activities. If you understand the
principles of this formal movement training language, then you are better
prepared to express a more informal or applicable form of human
movement everywhere else. You can start to connect the dots between
the safe, stable positions practiced in the gym to the movements you
perform outside the gym. For example, if you understand how to
organize your spine and stabilize your hips and shoulders correctly
while performing a deadlift or clean, you have a ubiquitous model for

                                    25
picking something off the ground. If you understand how to create a
braced-neutral trunk and generate torque off of a bar when performing a
pull-up, you will have no problem applying the same principles when
climbing a tree.
     This is the rub: If you only ever climb trees, it may be impossible to
know if you are working in the safest and most efficient positions—with
a stable shoulder and stable trunk—unless you also do formal pull-ups.
In other words, it’s a lot harder to identify whether someone is moving in
a safe, stable position when climbing a tree than when performing a pull-
up in the gym, even though both activities abide by the same
fundamental movement principles. So in addition to being a lab in which
to identify, diagnose, and treat poor movement practices, the gym is a
safe and controlled environment in which we can teach and layer these
ubiquitous concepts with accelerated learning capabilities and reduced
potential for injury.
     Moreover, the idea of creating a common movement language based
on formal strength-and-conditioning principles is why there can
suddenly be so much interdisciplinary, movement-based discussion and
collaboration. We are able to move beyond “people should train in
gymnastics,” to “people should train in gymnastics because the
handstand position easily teaches and exposes shoulder stability and
organization and has the same finish position and shoulder demands as
the jerk.” The commonality and universality of “formal” human
movement is easily understood by coach and athlete alike, and it is easy
to track and test changes in positional quality by measuring the very
thing we are chasing in the gym anyway—performance. This is
precisely why we keep track of work output, wattage, poundage, reps,
and time.
     Brilliant people have spent their entire lives developing systems that
help us understand how and why humans move the way they move and
have the ailments they do. Do these systems work? Of course they do.
They work to varying degrees and with varying application. Should we

                                    26
discard them? No, of course not. But there is a significant disconnect
between our older models of human movement and our current
understanding about how to best maximize human physical potential.
     Here’s a real-life example. Recently I was on a working vacation to
Australia with my wife and two daughters. We booked a few days at a
beautiful spa along Australia’s west coast. My wife, Juliet, noticed that
there was a free yoga class the following morning at 8 a.m. and thought
it would be amusing for me to attend. I showed up ten minutes before the
hour as I was instructed but found that I was the last person to arrive.
The instructor sighed in resignation when she saw 225-pound me walk
into her yoga class “late.” (There were already fifteen or so intense I-do-
yoga–looking women there; I was the only man.)
     In a fake-pleasant voice, she asked me if I’d ever done yoga. I said I
had, which was true: I’d done a lot of yoga when I was much younger.
Not five minutes into the session she started making very
complimentary comments about the abilities of the “bloke” in the back
row. “Great job back there!” “Wow!” And the more effusive and
surprised the instructor became, the more I became the hated target of
all the skinny women struggling with the postures.
     At the end of class, the instructor rushed right up and apologized for
not recognizing that I was obviously an advanced practitioner. (I mean
clearly I’m a beginner, but I was loads better than everyone else, and I
do lift weights and perform gymnastics.) When she asked me where I
practiced, I laughed a little and said that I didn’t. In my nicest voice I said
that I actually hadn’t done yoga in over ten years. She was a little taken
aback: I could clearly perform the movements in her class, but didn’t
actually practice. So she had to ask, “What do you do?”
     I said I was a teacher.


 HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

                                      27
     To help you navigate this book, it’s important that you understand
the basic construct and function of my Movement and Mobility
System.
     There are three movement principles: midline stabilization and
organization (spinal mechanics), one-joint rule, and laws of torque.
Think of the movement principles as the master blueprint for creating
safe and stable positions for all human movements. You will learn
about these in chapters 2, 3, and 4. If you practice them in the order
presented, you will know how to stabilize your spine in a braced, well-
organized position; how to maintain good posture during loaded,
dynamic movements; and how to create stability in your joints to
generate maximum force, power, and speed. Then you will have the
necessary foundation to properly execute the strength-and-
conditioning exercises in chapter 5.
     Realize that you can immediately apply the movement principles
to the actions of sports and life. Once you understand position as a
skill and the underpinnings of stability, you can start to bring
consciousness to your position in all situations, whether you’re
trapped behind a desk at work, picking up your child, carrying
groceries, or playing volleyball. But mastering the movement
principles takes practice. And you need to be able to identify
restrictions in range-of-motion and motor-control dysfunction so that
you can isolate and solve your unique problems. That’s why the
movement principles are practiced in a safe, controlled environment
(the gym) using fundamental (transferable) strength-and-conditioning
movements.
     In chapter 5, “Movement Hierarchy,” you will learn how to
properly execute functional full-range strength-and-conditioning
movements—squatting, pulling, and pressing iterations—as well as
how to identify and correct common movement errors. Once you
understand and can apply the movement principles to functional
movements, you will have no problem using those skills to correct

                                  28
errors and optimize movement efficiency for all of your movements.
    The key is to prioritize position and movement first. Most of you
will probably want to skip right to the mobilization techniques later in
the book. And if you have a tight muscle or a painful joint that needs to
be dealt with, by all means go there. (See chapter 7, “The Systems.”)
But know that you will never get to the bottom of your pain and
dysfunction if you don’t correct the movement or position that is
causing the problem. It’s like treating a symptom without addressing
the disease. The problem will still be there.

    Note: The evolution of the Movement and Mobility System
continues to progress at an exponential rate. New ways of improving
performance and torturing athletes are being developed every day in
the San Francisco CrossFit laboratory. For the latest and most up-to-
date mobilizations, go to MobilityWOD.com.




                                   29
                            CHAPTER 1
                  THE MOVEMENT
                   AND MOBILITY
                     SYSTEM

     How do you know you have some sort of musculoskeletal problem?
More specifically, how do you know when what you are doing or how
you are doing it is wrong? Typically, the average athlete uses a set of
cues like pain, swelling, loss of range-of-motion, decreased force, or
numbness and tingling. The medical community calls these
“pathognomonic” signs or cues. The conversation with yourself begins
something like this: “When I run lately, my knee hurts. I wonder what’s
wrong with my knee?” While typical, there are many errors in this line
of thought.
     The first problem is that pain and the other symptoms of injury are
all lagging indicators. For example, swelling might indicate tissue
overuse or strain from poor mechanics. But swelling is an after-the-fact
sign. The tissue damage has already occurred. It’s too late to go back.
It’s helpful to have a diagnostic tool, something that will highlight your
dysfunction and let you know something is wrong, but only if it is
applicable before the fact.
     Imagine having to blow up your car engine to know if you should add
oil. Or a soldier having to wait for his weapon to jam in the middle of a
firefight before he knows if he should perform some preventative
maintenance. That would be ridiculous, right? Of course. But in general
terms, this is how modern sports medicine operates. We wait until

                                    30
something is broken, sometimes horribly so, before we expect our
physician or physiotherapist to fix it. This paradigm keeps orthopedic
surgeons very busy.
     You can imagine what the doctor thinks when you come into his
office with a hole in your kneecap from years of poor movement
practices and overly tight tissues. Seriously? That bone in your knee
was designed to last 110 years. You managed to wear a hole in it in
twenty (true story). Imagine waiting until you are suffering from
unrelenting back pain and having your leg go numb to find out that you
used poor spinal mechanics carrying that 100-pound pack as a young
marine (true story).
     It’s like this: Our bodies are set up to go through millions of
movement cycles. Every time you squat, bend over, or walk in a
compromised position, you’re burning through those cycles at an
accelerated rate. Think of turning on and off the lights in your house. That
light switch is set up for tens of thousands of cycles. Well, your body is
set up for millions of cycles. Seriously, millions! So by the time you’ve
worn a hole in your kneecap, herniated your disk, or torn your labrum,
chances are good that you’ve expended millions of cycles. In other
words, your tissues and joints didn’t just wear out; your body put up with
your crappy positions and movements for the equivalent of millions of
cycles. Everyone is different—genetics, training volume, and other
lifestyle factors have a profound impact—but if you learn to move the
way the body is designed to move, there’s less stress on the system,
reducing the number of cycles you burn through.
     The second issue is that the human animal is set up for survival.
Your central nervous system (CNS) controls the sensory and
mechanical information for the entire body. It’s not an accident that the
pain and movement pathways in the brainstem are one and the same. If
a child bangs her finger, the first thing she does is to start moving it
around. Why? She can no longer hear the pain signal along with the
movement signal. This is a very elegant system to keep people moving

                                    31
and surviving because it literally relegates those pesky pain signals to
background noise, which you can’t hear until you stop moving. Put
another way, movement (sensory input) overrides the pain signal so that
you can continue moving, exercising, and training. No wonder your
shoulder starts to throb when you lie down and go to sleep. Your brain is
no longer receiving any movement signal input. All your brain gets now
is full-blown pain.
     Now imagine training like an athlete your whole life. You’ve spent
countless hours ignoring the horrible pain signals your body is sending
while you train and compete. There is little chance that you can actually
hear the pain of tissue injury failure amid all that movement and other
pain noise. Pain doesn’t actually work during periods of high movement
load and peak output demand. Add stress into the equation, and it’s a
recipe for disaster. If you’ve ever been in a fight, you know that one of the
great secrets of fighting is that you probably won’t feel any immediate
pain. If you talk to professional fighters, they’ll tell you that they feel
violent impacts and concussion but don’t immediately feel pain. Humans
are designed to be able to take the hit, keep fighting, and deal with the
consequences later. And there are certainly consequences to getting
haymakered in the face.




                                     32
    In actuality, exercise presents a similar scenario. What you can
count on is an absolute assuredness that when you start to lose position
and compromise your tissues—like rounding your back during a deadlift
—you may not feel it at the time, especially if you’re under competition
stress. However, just as a fighter feels the abuse from combat after his
adrenaline has worn off, an athlete’s back will scream in pain when he
cools down from a workout where he did twenty improperly executed
deadlifts. Just as you could say that the more skilled fighter usually
suffers the least amount of damage and as a result doesn’t feel as much
—if any—pain after battle, the better you are at deadlifting, the less likely
you are to tweak your back.

                                     33
     The third problem with our current thinking is that it continues to be
based on a model that prioritizes task completion above everything else.
It’s a sort of one-or-zero, task-done-or-not, weight-lifted-or-not,
distance-swam-or-not, mentality. This is like saying: “I deadlifted 500-
pounds, but I herniated a disk,” or “I finished a marathon, but now I have
plantar fasciitis and wore a hole in my knee.” Imagine this sort of ethic
spilling over into the other aspects of your life: “Hey, I made you some
toast! But I burned down the house.”
     Hang out at the end of any local marathon and you’ll notice a
significant number of finishers who are obviously suffering. They look as
if they were hit by cars and stricken by disease. Yes, you say, but they
finished. And this is true. Being task-completion obsessed certainly has
its place, like in the Olympic finals, a world championship, the Super
Bowl, or a military mission. But even then, there may be a heavy price
to pay. Couple this task-priority blindness with an overly simplified
system of a pain’s indicators and it’s easy to understand how athletes
can dig themselves into some pretty deep holes.
     Many athletes go about their business this way for decades,
spending their genetic inheritance, getting their daily workout done
without pain, until one day it’s game over. You can lift with a rounded
back and sit in a chair in a slouched position, until one day you can’t. So
how do you keep people from harming themselves? You need a set of
leading indicators—a set of observable, measurable, and repeatable
diagnostic tools that allow you to predict potential problems before they
manifest as a recognizable disorder. The good news is that we already
possess this information. It’s called positioning.


It’s About Performance
    Human movement, and by extension the body’s positions within
those movements, is really just a combination of biomechanics and
movement technique. By exposing people to a broad palette of

                                    34
movements, by making people express body control through full, normal
ranges of motion, we are able to expose holes and inefficiencies in their
motor-control and mobility. We can make the invisible visible.
     This means that while we are training for a stronger set of legs, or a
bigger set of lungs, we are simultaneously thinking in terms of
diagnostics. The deadlift is no longer just a matter of picking up
something heavy from the floor. Rather, it becomes a dynamic question:
Does the athlete have the capacity to keep his spine efficiently braced
and stable and express full posterior-chain range-of-motion while
picking up something and breathing hard in a stressful environment? We
don’t need to develop an entirely new set of correlate or diagnostic
movements to understand what is happening when people lift something
off the ground. Rather, we simply need to see and understand what’s
happening during the movement he is performing. That means you not
only have to understand why the movement is performed, but also how
to do it correctly.
     Repurposing training so that it also serves as a diagnostic tool is
useful on many other fronts as well. First, it’s efficient. Systematically
and effectively assessing and screening for movement problems in
athletes can be an enormous moving target at best and a colossal
exercise in misplaced precision at worst. Any system or set of tools that
helps us better understand what is going on under the hood is a good
thing. Here’s the key: Any good assessment tool, even one that’s built on
movement correlates rather than actual movement, needs to be easily
scalable, meaning that the movement or exercise can be adjusted and
applied to all athletes. It needs to be topical, addressing the issues that
the coach is seeing that day, with that set of athletes, with those
movements. Ultimately, it has to be able to render changes that both the
coach and the athlete can observe, measure, and repeat. Over time, this
daily combination of training and assessment frees the coach and athlete
to work through and discover problems systematically.
     What you have to remember is that human movement is complex

                                    35
and nuanced. Marrying the diagnostic process to the training process
ensures that no stone will go unturned. However, we can’t train every
movement or energy system an athlete may use in a single training
session. Nor do we need to assess and address every deficiency in the
athlete in a single day. It’s a lifelong process of identifying problems,
fixing them, and then exposing more holes in the athletic profile with
more challenging stimulus. It’s a never-ending cycle of correcting
problems and finding new ones. This is how we become better athletes.
     This model, based on the movements and training of the day, has the
added benefit of being psychologically manageable in scope and
practice. Anyone can fix one problem at a time. But the typical list of
dysfunction for the average athlete is just that, a list. The most important
thing we can do is to get the athlete to train and address the problems
along the way. Small, consistent positional interventions don’t create
extreme, additional time demands on the athlete or the coach. The
priority remains training, not resolving what is probably a laundry list of
dysfunction in one training session.
     I have yet to meet an athlete with perfect motor-control, mobility, and
biomechanical efficiency. Hell, most of the really successful athletes I
know are dumping huge amounts of torque, bleeding horrendous
amounts of force, and missing key corners in their range-of-motion. Yet
they are still the best in the world. A ten- or fifteen-minute intervention
performed on the spot, within the context of the current training, is
manageable and sustainable. The modern training session is a little
miracle. It’s a frantic, compressed session of teaching, nutritional and
lifestyle counseling, strength work, skill work, metabolic conditioning,
and mobility work. Layering complex, time-demanding, full body
diagnostic movements and interventions on top of a cramped training
session, especially if you’re training several athletes at once, will only
make you throw your hands up and revert to a wait-till-they-break
model. But if a coach is able to program a few specific fixes for the
demands of the day’s movements, then the coach wins and the athlete is

                                    36
able to embody the connection between mobilization and improved
positioning. Athletes are both greedy and smart—greedy in that they will
do whatever it takes to get better in the shortest amount of time possible,
and smart in that they will absolutely repeat specific practices and
interventions that improve their performance or take away their pain.
     The second benefit of using training exercises as a diagnostic tool is
that it shifts the issues of lost or poor positioning from the realm of injury
prevention to the realm of performance. This has twofold implication.
The first is that it diverts the athlete’s focus from task completion. “Well,
I didn’t get hurt, my knees aren’t in pain, and I have an Olympic gold
medal, so why should I care about injury prevention?” But, if we focus on
output, the athlete is in a constant state of chasing performance, of eking
out small changes in position, efficiency, work output, poundage, and
wattage. Our goal isn’t just to make the best athletes in the world. Our
goal is to make the best athletes in the world better.
     These are the metrics that matter, because functioning well is never
a force-production or a work-output compromise. We don’t have to
make the binary choice between safety and a world record, sacrificing
one for the other. If we chase performance first, we get injury prevention
in the bargain. If we obsess over the reasons behind poor positioning, we
get better mechanical advantage, improved leverage, and more efficient
force production. For example, improved hip mechanics may mean a
change in the total range-of-motion of the athlete’s hip, but when it
translates into a world-record squat, it actually means a little more to the
athlete. When we are able to improve a rower’s thoracic extension, she
will definitely sit taller on the seat and have better shoulder control. But
when she notices greater wattage output and decreased times, she is a
believer and will reproduce the phenomenon herself.
     Using the training movements of the day as an instantaneous and
ongoing diagnostic screening tool serves athletic development in other
ways as well. For example, assessing an athlete for mechanical
dysfunction with common screening processes is primarily a snapshot

                                     37
of that athlete on that day. It’s not uncommon to run into athletes who
have recently acquired tissue stiffness after a brutal training micro-
cycle, tournament, or prolonged mission. Programming
diagnostic/mobility work based on a well-rounded strength-and-
conditioning program’s daily movement is a roving, built-in, periodized
system. Nothing is missed as long as an athlete is performing
movements that express full range-of-motion and motor-control within
those ranges. This leads to another useful change in the conceptual
framework of what the gym can and should be.


The Gym Is Your Lab
     The modern strength-and-conditioning center should be considered a
human-performance laboratory. The goal of both the coach and the
athlete should be to exceed any strength, speed, or metabolic demand
the athlete might need in life, sport, or shift on the SWAT team. It should
also be the place where the coach and athlete hunt out every positional
inefficiency, every poor mechanical tendency, and every default or
compensatory movement pattern. Where else can the athlete safely
expose his movement and tissue dysfunctions? The training center/lab
is a controlled environment where the coach and athlete can safely and
systematically layer skill progressions while simultaneously addressing
mechanical and range-of-motion issues.
     The hallmark of any good strength-and-conditioning program is
twofold: to consistently and routinely challenge both the strength and
fitness components of an athlete’s constitution, and to express motor-
control under a wide variety of demands and situations. For example,
most movement screens, quick-movement tests, or range-of-motion
tests are performed statically and without any external load. The
problem is that these tests don’t even come close to replicating real-life
demands, much less those of a sport or combat mission. But if the
paradigm is altered, and if the strength-and-conditioning program

                                    38
continuously challenges an athlete’s position with the additional stresses
of actual load, metabolic demand, speed, and competition, there is little
doubt that the athlete’s conditioned tendencies, default motor patterns,
and true physical self will be revealed.
    Let’s use a simple example to help illustrate my point. We regularly
see athletes who can correctly perform an overhead squat with a PVC
pipe. This is the most challenging squat iteration because it has high hip
and ankle demands: The athlete must keep his torso absolutely upright
and his shoulders stable while the load is locked out overhead. But what
if we take that same person and have him or her run 400 meters, then
overhead squat anything heavier than a barbell for more than a few
repetitions, all while competing against someone else? We end up with
a totally different athlete. And all we did was add a little bit of volume,
intensity, stress, and metabolic demand to the overhead squat. Very
quickly, and very safely, we make the invisible visible.
    The point is that the athlete who flashes the quick test will
sometimes fall apart under real-life working conditions. We just have to
adjust load, volume, and intensity to match the abilities and capacities of
the athlete. We do this not only to expose holes in the athlete’s
movement profile, but also to make her stronger, faster, more explosive,
and a more capable human being. In other words, if you’re coaching an
athlete who has perfect form and fast times, you need to up the weight,
volume, and metabolic demands, as well as introduce movements that
require a higher degree of motor-control and mobility. We should be
seeking thresholds where our athletes begin to breakdown, and use that
not only as an assessment and diagnostic tool, but also as a way to
make the athlete better.
    Coaches have always done this in the gym, but typically only by
challenging the athlete with load and sometimes with repetition. It’s not
an accident that some of the best strength coaches on the planet will
regularly advocate for a twenty-plus-rep squat set, or a maximal fifteen-
rep set of overhead squats. There are great athletes who can buffer their

                                    39
movement dysfunctions—meaning that they can hide their mobility
restrictions and poor technique—for short periods of time, but regularly
lose effective positioning when they begin to fatigue even a little. But if an
athlete has the mobility and motor-control to maintain a stable spine,
hips, and knees during a brutal working couplet of heavy front squats and
running, then that athlete is more likely to be able to reproduce that
efficient mechanical positioning when it matters the most (say, in the
last 500 meters of the Olympic rowing final).
     As I said, the gym is the lab. It’s practically impossible for a coach to
follow around hundreds of athletes while they’re engaged in their actual
sport in order to spot movement errors. That coach would not only have
to be a world-class expert in hundreds of sports and have perfect timing
—catching the athlete when he or she just happens to break down—he
would also need the skill set to correct those faults within the context of
that particular sport.
     Fortunately, strength-and-conditioning coaches don’t have to be an
expert in every training modality to identify and fix problems that are
specific to an athlete’s chosen sport. All they need to do is repurpose the
training movements so that they also serve as diagnostic tools. That
coach will be able to observe and highlight every aspect of an athlete’s
movement quality and fix the suboptimal pieces.
     This coach/athlete/test/retest–centric model moves the strength-and-
conditioning program to the heart of athletic development and the heart of
any human-performance/resiliency model. A program that is organized
around challenging an athlete’s movement capacities with load, speed,
cardiorespiratory and metabolic demand, and stress leaves very few
body and capacity dysfunction stones unturned. For example, we
regularly work with world-class athletes who cannot perform the most
basic and light deadlifting, squatting, or pushups without horribly
dysfunctional movement. It’s not surprising that these same athletes
have difficulty maintaining decent spinal or shoulder positioning at the
end of a race. If an athlete understands the principles of, say, midline

                                     40
stabilization and shoulder-torque development—both of which are
covered in this book—he will be able to apply those principles to another
set of movement demands. Running is just maintaining a braced and
neutral spine while falling forward and extending the hip. And rowing
looks an awful lot like performing a light deadlift while breathing really,
really hard. For the strength coach, this is invaluable insight.
    The role of the coach is to prepare the athlete physically for the
demands of his sport (even if this sport is life or combat), and serve as
the athlete’s chief movement and mobility diagnostician. The goal of
every lab/gym is to ready the athlete for new skill and task acquisition.
The athlete who has few mobility restrictions and understands and has
been training in principle-based movement is literally a blank canvas for
the coach. It doesn’t matter if you’ve never wrestled or played volleyball
before: if you understand how to get organized—how to stabilize your
trunk and create torque in your extremities—you enter the playing field
with a distinct advantage.
    Remember, classical strength-and-conditioning movements
(gymnastics, Olympic lifting, powerlifting, sprinting, etc.) are the
vocabulary of the human movement language. Sport doesn’t really look
exactly like squatting and benching. But if we connect the dots for our
athletes, drawing their attention to the principles inherent in these
movements, they can apply those principles to the new set of variables
that is their sport. I can’t tell you how many calls we get from coaches
who want to thank us for preparing athletes for optimal coaching.
    Think about it like this: If a person understands grammar and
spelling, then he can write a sentence. If a football player understands
how to create shoulder torque off a barbell or pull-up bar, he’ll be able to
find the stable and effective shoulder position needed to tackle another
player. Conversely, if the coach observes that the athlete loses effective
shoulder stability in the bottom of a bench press, that pattern will
probably present as a more vulnerable and less effective shoulder
position during tackling.

                                    41
You Are an Amazing, Adaptable,
Healing Machine
    The human being has an immense capacity to heal itself. At any age,
and in nearly any state, the human animal is capable of an incredible
amount of tissue repair and remodeling. Clearly torn ACLs don’t
magically reattach, and herniated lumbar disks are slow to heal, but the
human body will take a ton of abuse for a really long time before it finally
gives up the fight.
    For example, I was in an elevator in Las Vegas a few years ago with
another coach with whom I was teaching a course on human
performance at a local gym. On the way down, the elevator stopped and
a woman got on. This woman was at least as wide as she was tall. She
was holding one of those very long, fifty-plus-ounce beer cups with a big
straw, carrying a bag of pastries, and smoking. The best part was, she
apparently felt great! She was stoked and actually flirted with the two of
us during our short time together! When she got out, we both looked at
each other in awe. I think I spoke first, “Well, that proves one thing.
Human beings are very hard to kill.”
    This is the problem: Our bodies will put up with our silly movement
and lifestyle choices because they have a freakish amount of functional
tolerance built in. We shouldn’t, however, make the classic error of
confusing this miraculous genetic inheritance with a tacit rationalization
for eating, sleeping, or moving however we please. This incredible
mountain of a woman illustrates a larger point: Most of the typical
musculoskeletal dysfunction that people and athletes deal with is really
just preventable disease.
    When thinking about movement dysfunction, it’s useful to classify
pain and injury in four categories, which I’ve organized here according to
frequency of occurrence:

That which accounts for 2 percent of movement dysfunction in a

                                    42
typical gym:

1. Pathology (something serious is going on with your system)
2. Catastrophic injury (you got hit by a car)

Pathology
    This category is in the realm of traditional medicine, and any good
practitioner/coach is thinking on this level during any conversation with
an athlete: “I don’t think it’s just back pain you’re experiencing. It sounds
like you have the makings of a kidney infection.” Or: “I don’t think you’re
overtrained. Based on that bright red ring around that suspicious bite on
your arm, you may need to get checked out for Lyme disease.” These
are both real-life examples and why a good clinician always asks about
changes in bladder or bowel function, unaccounted-for weight loss or
gain, night sweats, dizziness, fever, nausea, or vomiting—just to make
sure that “knee pain” isn’t “knee cancer.” We tell our coaches that if
something doesn’t fit about the way athletes are talking about their
musculoskeletal issues, they should always punt them to their
physician. Pathology is dealt with through traditional medicine and
honestly accounts for about a whopping 1 percent or less of the typical
problems we see in the gym.

Catastrophic Injury
    This category includes getting hit by a car, jumping downwind out of
an airplane at night and landing on a stump, or having a three hundred
pound lineman roll into your knee. This is where modern sports
medicine excels. Bad things are going to happen to soldiers and athletes
working to their limits in their respective fields. Reconstruction and
injury-management capabilities are at an all-time high. Fortunately,
except for wounded warriors, this category also falls into the 1 percent
bucket.
    So if we have accounted for roughly 2 percent of the typical

                                     43
movement dysfunction we catch in the gym, where do the other 98
percent reside? Simple, they reside within the preventable-disease
categories of overtension and open-circuit faulting.

That which accounts for 98 percent of all the dysfunction we see
in the typical athlete:

3. Overtension (missing range-of-motion)
4. Open-circuit faults (moving in a bad position)

Overtension
    We regularly observe athletes who lack significant ranges of motion.
For example, it’s not uncommon to see an Olympic medalist missing 50
percent or more range-of-motion in the anterior-chain system of the hips
and quadriceps. Imagine having dinner with a good friend and noticing
that he can’t bend his elbow past 90-degrees.
    “What’s wrong with your elbow?” you’d ask.
    “Oh, nothing,” he’d say. “I just set the bench press world record. But
my neck and wrist kill me every time I eat.”
    This example would be silly except that it is not unusual. In general,
though, it occurs in less socially crippling joint/tissue systems like the
ankle, shoulder, and hip. And don’t just think flexion (bending) and
extension (straightening). Full range-of-motion has to include your
body’s rotational capacities as well. Move your hand to your face as if
you are going to eat. Is there resistance in this range-of-motion? There
shouldn’t be. Your limbs and joints should get stiff near end-range and
then suddenly stop. They should not be limited in range nor be
excessively stiff through full range-of-motion. Either symptom is a
simple sign that your tissue-based mechanical system is overtensioned.
Put simply, you’re missing normal ranges of motion as a result of your
tight tissues.
    In nearly every athlete we evaluate for compensated mechanics or

                                    44
for injured and painful tissues, we find an obvious and significant
restriction in the joints or tissues immediately above or below the site of
the dysfunction. Achilles tendinopathy? Weird that your calf is brutally
short and stiff and that your ankle has no dorsiflexion. What? You’ve
worn a hole in your kneecap and have chondromalacia? I’ll bet that your
hip extension is limited and that you don’t have full range-of-motion in
the tissue of your upper leg. To put it simply: If you have ankle pain,
chances are good that your calves are tight and are pulling on your
ankle, limiting your range-of-motion. If you have knee pain, chances are
good that your quads, hips, hamstrings, and calves (all the musculature
that connects to your knee) are brutally tight. It’s no mystery why you
have pain: You can’t get into the correct positions or move with good
form because you’re missing key ranges of motion. Mitigating
overtensioned systems using mobilization techniques feeds “slack” to
the “injured” site, reducing localized joint pain by improving the
efficiency of the system.
     Here’s an analogy: A tight hinge on a door will have a pile of dust
underneath it. So if the tissues surrounding your knee—quads and
calves—are tight, you will literally have a pile of meniscus dust
underneath it. The brutally stiff tissues upstream and downstream of the
joint cause a mechanical deformation that affects how the joint moves
and operates.
     It’s important to note that when we have traditionally thought of
overtensioned tissues pairing, like “hamstrings and back pain,”1 we
have typically laid the lion’s share of culpability on the “short muscle”
aspect of the system. But it’s not this simple. Muscle “length” is a far
more complex phenomenon comprising, among other things,
intramuscular stiffness, neurodynamics, motor-control, hip and joint
mechanics, and even hydration. What does ultimately matter, however,
is that if the system is overtensioned, it needs to be remedied—by
addressing position and range-of-motion restrictions.


                                    45
Open-Circuit Faults
    This category encompasses most of the serious athletic trauma in
the world of strength-and-conditioning. Injuries like ACL tears, flexion-
related disk herniations, torn biceps tendons, labral tears of the hip and
shoulder, and torn Achilles tendons belong in this category. Your body is
a simple mechanical system composed of “wet” biological tissues. It
operates best when it is able to create ideal, stable positions before it
generates freakish outputs of power.
    In fact, most people are familiar with the maxim that functional
movement begins in a wave of contraction from the core to sleeve, from
trunk to periphery, from axial skeleton to peripheral skeleton. This
principle is a good example of the body operating best when all of its
circuits are closed—spine stable and braced, hip stable, shoulder stable,
ankle not collapsed, etc.—before movement is initiated. The problem is
that the body will always be able to generate force, even in poor
positions. This is not unlike being able to temporarily get away with
driving your car with no oil in the engine or with a flat tire. Sure, you can
do it; it just gets expensive. Your body will always default to a
“secondary” or “second order” system of stabilization.
    Here’s an example: Children with cerebral palsy have damaged
motor-control systems in their brains. They are cognitively intact; they
just have aspects of movement that aren’t well controlled in the brain
itself. Yet these children are able to ambulate despite this. Their bodies
are clever enough to default to a collapsed arch and ankle, internally
rotated and valgus knee, internally rotated and impinged hip, and
overextended lumbar spine. These kids are literally able to leverage
their tissues into secondary positions of stability that turn out to be quite
functional—until they wear out. These positions should look familiar to
anyone watching a heavy front squat gone wrong. If you don’t or can’t
create a stable position from which to generate force, your body will
provide one for you. You don’t need to address your ankle or hip range-
of-motion; your body will address it by turning your feet out. You don’t

                                     46
need to work on restoring anterior hip range-of-motion; your body will
overextend at the lumbar spine.

Open-Circuit Faults Include:
         Rounded back
         Shoulders rolled forward
         Overextended lumbar spine
         Feet turned out
         Head tilted up or down
         Elbows flared out

    Herein lies the problem: We have confused functionality with
physiology. Positions that have served us functionally—like jumping and
landing with feet like a duck’s—quickly become a liability when speed,
load, or fatigue is introduced. Sure, you can lift heavy loads with a
rounded back (default spine-stability position) for a long, long time, but at
some point your tissues will fail, resulting is some kind of injury.
Eventually those “off label” tissue uses with which you exercised and
moved so freely will expire.
    The implications of this concept are incredible. Most of the ACL
injuries in the world are … preventable, especially in children. Most of
the shoulder dislocations we see are … preventable. Most of the
herniated disks we see are … preventable. Remember, your tissues are
designed to last 110 years. You just have to know what the stable,
tissue-saving, catastrophe-avoiding positions are. And, you have to
practice them. A lot.


You Cannot Make Basic Adaptation

                                     47
Errors
    As I said earlier, I will teach you how to use the safest and most
effective positions for your body so that you can optimize performance
and resolve pain and dysfunction. But before moving on to the actual
diagnostics, movement, and mobilizations, it’s important for you to
understand that lifestyle errors have a direct impact on how well or how
poorly you move. Let’s address these now and set the foundation for
your success.
    We cannot make basic errors in our lifestyles and expect our bodies
to be able to absorb the consequences when we are working in a
performance-biased paradigm. For example, it is possible to make
fundamental errors in hydration, nutrition, sleep, and stress and not
suffer any direct impact on our elliptical biceps training. However, every
athlete at the top of his game can make direct correlations between the
errors listed above and his potential for creating significant decreases in
performance outputs. Being dehydrated by even 2 percent can cause a
decrease in VO2 output of 5 percent to 10 percent. Less than six hours of
sleep? Say hello to elevated blood-glucose levels (think pre-diabetes).
Stressed out? Forget about getting a healthy adaptation response to that
crushingly difficult workout—you will simply get crushed.
    The less obvious implication of lifestyle maladaptation is on the
athlete’s tissues. Connective tissue, menisci, spinal disks, fascia,
articular cartilages, tendons, and ligaments all suffer from the
immediate and downstream effects of unhealthy lifestyle choices.
Managing and optimizing the lifestyle aspects of sports performance are
certainly beyond the scope of this book, but I would be remiss if I did not
mention that we regularly observe significant changes in an athlete’s
mobility (and ultimately position) when he begins to address and correct
these vital aspects.

Adaptation Errors Include:

                                    48
           No warm-up or cool down
           Sleep deprivation
           Dehydration
           Poor nutrition
           Prolonged sitting
           Chronic inflammation
           Stress
           Insulin insensitivity

    It’s easy get overwhelmed when you consider how complicated
human movement can be and how many different aspects of your life
directly affect mechanics and tissue health. But underlying all of this
beautifully complex technology is a simple truth: Your body has an
amazing capacity to deal with your poor mechanics. It also has an
extraordinary capacity to self-correct with just a little input.
    All human beings should be able to perform basic maintenance on
their bodies. It is both a human right and a responsibility to understand
how your body works.




                                    49
                             CHAPTER 2
          MIDLINE STABILIZATION
           AND ORGANIZATION
                         (SPINAL MECHANICS)


    Throughout history, advanced thinkers have harped on the
importance of tightening the body, bracing the abdomen, and stabilizing
the trunk. The “core to extremity” concept is not a new idea. If you don’t
organize your spine optimally, you can’t stabilize and transmit force to
the primary engines of your hips and shoulders. This results in
staggering losses of stability, force, and power—all of which could be
otherwise channeled into fusion-reactor-hot athletic performance.
    Yet the spine remains the weak link. In my physical therapy practice,
I see trunk-related errors and weaknesses among the world’s best
athletes. A stable, well-organized spine is the key to moving safely and
effectively and maximizing power output and force production. So why
do so many athletes regularly commit fundamental spinal sins that
impede performance and invite injury?
    There are a few reasons. For starters, many athletes focus on
completing the lift or movement with little or no regard for good form.
Speed is often part of this equation, too. Consider an athlete craning his
head back to reach his chin over a bar during a pull-up. After all, it’s still
possible to generate huge amounts of force from a bad position without
immediate, overt negative consequences. I’ve seen athletes lift
enormous loads from rounded and overextended positions and walk
away unharmed, grinning from ear to ear. This isn’t always bad, and by
that I mean that it may be a conscious choice by a professional athlete
who has measured what he stands to gain against the cost. One
example: the powerlifter who chooses to round his back to break the

                                     50
deadlift world record. He knows damn well he’s flirting with potential
injury, but he’s willing to take the risk. Another example? The Major
League pitcher throwing fastballs at 100 mph is less concerned with his
elbow than with a multi-million-dollar contract. Again, these are
conscious choices.
    For most athletes, however, the risk is not worth it. Moving
incorrectly, especially in a training environment, not only increases
susceptibility to injury, it develops and reinforces faulty body mechanics
that will exact payment during more complex movements. Patterns
repeated in practice will be revealed at game time. Rounding your back
for a deadlift will ensure that you tackle with a flexed spine. Your
dysfunctional, overextended spine, pushup position will transfer to
overextension in your running. Sure, there is a strength stimulus of
sorts, but—and this is a critical message I want you to hear—sacrificing
good form will cannibalize your potential benefits. Hear this too: You
may get away with poor form at first, but poor mechanics—whether
rounding your shoulders in a deadlift or slumping in your computer chair
—will ultimately come down hard in the form of pain and injury.




                                   51
    Athletes who aren’t aware of these fundamental truths will
compromise form by default when training and competing. Of course,
they’d never do this if they immediately felt the consequences of their
actions, but often they don’t. As I’ve said, you can lift with a rounded
back, run like crap, and sit at your computer with your neck and
shoulders rounded for a long time … until you can’t. That’s when your
body offers up some hard truths—that you’ve been moving incorrectly or
that you’ve been hanging out in bad positions. And it doesn’t just whisper
in your ear; it crams the message down your throat by zapping your
ability to generate force and opening the floodgates to pain.
    Another problem that keeps athletes from prioritizing midline
stabilization or organizing the spine properly is the practice-makes-
perfect paradigm, which coaches unfortunately reinforce. Fact is, we do
a great job celebrating the completion of fifty pushups, but we haven’t
done a good job of identifying loss of good spinal positioning for our

                                   52
athletes. If you accomplished such a task with a back that looks like a
snake that’s been hit by a car, you’ve just taught yourself to generate
pressing force from that broken spinal position. And exercise is only the
half of it. If you sit at a computer all day with a rounded back, it shouldn’t
come as a big shock to you that you can’t brace your spine in a good
position and stabilize your shoulders during loaded athletic movements.
    Then again, athletes aren’t completely to blame. Many simply lack a
model for bracing their spine (not to mention the fact that most chairs
are designed for aesthetics not function). While trainers will talk
obsessively about core strength, posture, and bracing, they seldom
teach athletes how to organize and brace their spine as an independent
sequence. Instead, they attempt to ingrain midline stabilization in
athletes as they practice complex movements. This is like teaching a
child how to ride a bike and juggle at the same time. The child might get
the juggling part down, but there is a good chance he will crash that bike
into the nearest mailbox. When midline stabilization isn’t taught by itself,
the result is often poor bracing strategies. And poor bracing strategies
ultimately lead to a host of biomechanical compromises.


Three Reasons for Bracing Your Spine
     There is a step-by-step blueprint for stabilizing your spine: It’s called
the “bracing sequence.” But before I delve into that, you should
understand the reasons for prioritizing spinal mechanics over everything
else.
     First, learning how to brace your spine in a good position eliminates
one of the greatest threats to the human animal: injury to your central
nervous system (CNS). If you injure the meniscus in your knee, you can
still soldier on—you can still run, still fight. It might not be all that
pleasurable, but you can go on with your life. If you herniate a disk or
injure a facet joint, on the other hand, it’s game over: The whole human
mechanical system shuts down. You are unable to run, lift, move

                                     53
quickly, reproduce, have fun—you can’t do jack squat. And it is not a
minor interruption; potential injuries to your spine are a hard bell to
unring. There will be a long, brutally slow healing process on the docket.
In my practice, if an athlete has a little spinal tweak, it’s a minimum of
two days to get that athlete back into training. And that’s for a minor
positional fault. We regularly get calls from athletes who have missed a
week or two after a minor spine tweak. This is two weeks of preparation
(not to mention two weeks of less-than-optimal life experience) missed
because of a simple and preventable trunk-related error. Still think that
that extra back squat with an overextended lumbar spine was worth it?
    Second, a disorganized spine will lead to mechanical compromises.
For example, I regularly run into athletes who look as if they have
horribly restricted posterior-chain tissues—specifically their
hamstrings. Old school thinking would have us fix the problem by
stretching those stiff cables running down the backs of the legs. While
this may in fact improve hamstring flexibility, it doesn’t alleviate the
back pain. What we’ve found is that if we simply organize an athlete’s
spine into a braced, stable position, range-of-motion improves by
upwards of 50 percent. This is why we prioritize midline stabilization
and good movement mechanics over mobilization techniques, because
what often looks like tight musculature is really just the body protecting
the nervous system. So before we have someone smash the crap out of
his hamstrings, we make sure his spine is in a good position.
    Third, when you lose spinal positioning—head, ribcage, or pelvic
fault—you potentially shut down force production and lose the ability to
stabilize your hips and shoulders. That’s right, your shoulder and knee
pain could stem from your trunk instability.
    To clarify this, think of your trunk and spine as a chassis for the
primary engines of your hips and shoulders. If your spine is in a bad
position, creating a safe, functionally stable hip, knee, ankle, or shoulder
position is impossible. Again, that’s why we fix spinal positioning before
we go after the poor mechanics or tissue restrictions at the shoulders or

                                    54
hips: You’ll never fix those big engines if the chassis is broken.
    So it doesn’t matter what is going on at your shoulder, elbow, knee,
or ankle—whether it is a motor-control or mobility issue: If your spine is
out of whack you’re never going to be able to fix the problem.


The Bracing Sequence
   To reiterate, people default into mechanically unstable spinal
positions for three reasons:

       1. They have a task-completion, get-the-job-done mindset.
       2. They’ve ingrained poor positions and movement patterns in
          their training and day-to-day life.
       3. They don’t have a reproducible, all-encompassing bracing
          strategy that transfers to the majority of movements.

   The bottom line is that you need to have a conscious plan for bracing
your spine in a neutral position, a step-by-step template that will give
you the same results every single time. That way, when you’re tired,
scared, or under stress, your default motor pattern is the same: you
revert back to the same mechanically stable, neutrally braced spinal
position.




                                   55
Bracing Sequence



                     STEP 1
Squeeze your butt as hard as you can.




                           56
57
The first thing you need to do is set your pelvis in a neutral
position. To accomplish this, position your feet directly under
your hips—keeping your feet parallel to each other—screw your
feet into the ground and squeeze your butt as hard as you can.
Don’t think about tilting your pelvis. Just squeeze your butt. You
will always end up in the right position because it’s your butt—
those glutes were engineered specifically for your pelvis and
spine. A lot of people mistakenly think they can get tight by
simply engaging their abdomen. Although the musculature of
your trunk stabilizes your spine, it’s nearly impossible to use
your abdominals to control the position of your pelvis. For that
reason, you have to use your butt to set the position.




                               58
                          STEP 2
Pull your ribcage down.




                            59
60
Next, pull your lower ribs in, balancing your ribcage over your
pelvis. Imagine that your pelvis and ribcage are two bowls filled to
the brim with liquid. The idea is to keep your pelvis and ribcage
neutral so that liquid doesn’t spill out either end. If you overextend,
water pours out the front of your pelvis and out the back of your
ribcage. If you round forward into flexion, water pours out the back
of your pelvis and out the front of your ribcage. Although this
analogy only applies to standing perfectly upright in a braced-
neutral position—you can still be in a braced-neutral position and
hinge forward or lean back—the idea is to get your ribcage and
pelvis aligned.




                                   61
                        STEP 3
Get your belly tight.




                          62
63
The next step is to lock your pelvis and ribcage in place with your
abdominals. You can’t move with your butt squeezed so you need to
lock in the position by engaging your abs. Think about it like this:
Glutes set position, abs brace position. And you need at least 20
percent tension to set and maintain a braced-neutral spinal position.
To correctly execute this step, continue squeezing your glutes, take
in a big breath of air, and then exhale. As you let the air out, engage
your abs and get your belly tight. Think about shrink-wrapping your
spine with your abdomen by pulling your bellybutton to your spine.
It’s not sucking in or hollowing; it’s not even drawing in; it’s
stiffening in place as you exhale. As the musculature of your trunk
compresses toward your midline, you create a higher intra-
abdominal pressure around your spine, creating an even more rigid
lever. Another way to approach this step is to think about lifting your
pelvic floor, which is expressed with the common cue sphincter to
bellybutton. With your spine neutral, butt squeezed, and your belly
tight (stiffening as you exhale), now you can breathe into that tight
space or already compressed spinal system as if you were putting
compressed air into a steel tank. You don’t make the tank tight
around the air; you put air into the rigid tank (see “Breathing
Mechanics,” see here).




                                  64
                       STEP 4
Set your head in a neutral position and
screw your shoulders into a stable position.




                             65
66
  Lastly, center your head over your shoulders, and gaze forward.
  Think about aligning your ears over your shoulders, hips, and
  ankles. As you do this, draw the heads of your arm bones back,
  spreading your collarbones wide, and release your shoulders down.
  Keep your thumbs pointed forward and think about aligning. Note:
  You don’t need to squeeze your shoulder blades together; just feel
  the tips of your shoulder blades reaching toward your hips. This
  puts you in a stable position and represents a stable shoulder
  position.



     Go through this load-order sequence, burning the checklist into your
motor program, so that you can reproduce the same stable position in
any situation or environment. This takes time. In the beginning, it might
take 20 to 30 percent of your mental RAM just to keep your shoulders in
a stable, externally rotated position, your abs on tension, and your back
flat. You have to cultivate the mindset that anything that is not a braced-
neutral spinal position is probably going to kill you.
     To bring awareness to the bracing sequence, I developed a simple
and effective method to help coaches and athletes highlight spinal
positioning. I call it the two-hand rule.


The Two-Hand Rule
    This is a technique to help people see and feel the difference between
a braced-neutral position and a broken position, like when they’re
rounded forward or overextended.
    Here’s how it works: Take one thumb and put it on your sternum—
keeping your hand splayed, palm facing down—and pin your other
thumb on your pubic bone, creating two parallel planes. The key is to
keep your hands on the same horizontal plane as your ribcage and

                                    67
pelvis so that any deviation from neutral will reflect in a change in hand
position. If your hands move apart, you’re overextended. If your hands
move together, you’re rounded forward.




    Although we should think of the spine as one contiguous stable
structure with the same nervous system running through it, dividing it
into parts is a convenient way to spot spinal faults. This is why the two-
hand rule is so effective: it brings a heightened sense of awareness to
these reference points—pelvis and ribcage—so that you can start to
identify where you or your athlete is losing form.
    There’s just one problem with this model. We miss a key reference
point, which is every bit as important as the pelvis and ribcage—the
head. In fact, it would be very useful if we had a third hand because there
are three main parts to the spinal system: the head (cervical spine),
ribcage (thoracic spine), and pelvis (lumbar spine). If any one of these
pieces is out of alignment, it’s difficult to create optimal positioning.
    When using the two-hand rule to bring awareness to the bracing
sequence and spotting spinal faults, don’t forget that your head is an

                                    68
essential factor: if your head is out of position—meaning that it’s tilted
forward or back—you compromise spinal position and lose the ability to
stabilize the structures of your primary engines. The Tony Blauer test is
a perfect example of this.


 Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
     Whenever you’re in an overextended position, your pelvic floor
 turns off, which can unleash problems galore, especially among
 women. For example, one of the things that happens when women
 jump and land, or more commonly when they’re doing double unders
 —meaning passing a rope under the feet twice per jump when
 jumping rope—is that they have trouble controlling their bladder. (And
 this is one of the problems with doing pike double unders.) Fixing this
 problem is really simple: squeeze your butt to set your pelvis in a
 neutral position, and then get your belly tight to brace the position.
 What you’ll find is that a lot of the issues caused by pelvic floor
 dysfunction spontaneously resolve once your pelvis is locked into a
 neutral position.




                                    69
    Whether you’re performing double unders or jumping up and
down, you want to go through the bracing sequence, keep your
shoulders back, and maintain abdominal tension to keep you pelvis
locked in a neutral position.




    If your butt and abs are offline, maintaining a neutral spinal position
is nearly impossible to manage. You will automatically default into an
overextended position. This is a mechanism for low back pain and a
host of other problems.




                                    70
71
     I’ve established a figure four lock on Carl’s right arm. With his arm
straight, spine neutral, fingers splayed, and shoulder externally rotated, I
can’t bend his arm. But the moment he looks up or down, or deviates
from a neutral head position, his arm bends instantaneously. This drill
really helps to illuminate the fact that if you break a neutral head position,
it throws a kink in the entire system and destabilizes the structures
downstream, making it impossible to maintain an integrated position.

                                     72
The same thing occurs during a squat. The moment you throw your
head back, you immediately default into an overextended position.

    As you can see, the moment an athlete deviates from a neutral head
position, you lose stability and the flow of potential force with it. And this
is not limited solely to the head. Anytime you see one or two vertebral
segments hinge or express greater degrees of motion in relation to the
rest of the spine—whether it’s the head, ribcage, or pelvis—creating a
stable carriage is nearly impossible. This is what I refer to as a local-
extension or local-flexion spinal fault.




    If you overextend at your lumbar spine as you initiate a squat, round
your back while picking something off the ground, tilt your ribcage back
as your press a weight overhead, or crane your head back to raise your
chin over the bar during a pull-up, you’re committing a local extension
fault that compromises your entire biomechanical system. (To learn
how to correct these faults, see chapter 5, “Movement Hierarchy.”)
    This is why we have to look at the spine as a continuum. If you’re

                                      73
trying to generate force and one section of your spine is wobbling back
and forth, you’re doomed. Not only will you leak power, but you’ll also
risk creating significant spinal shear forces across your nervous system
and the structures of your spine. You’re opening the door to destructive
forces—in the short run, it can shut down force production, and in the
long run, it may result in spondylolisthesis, herniated discs, pars
fractures, and stenosis.


Braced-Neutral Standing Position




                                  74
Now that you have a model for organizing your spine in a neutral

                               75
position and can spot local extension faults, you can start to apply the
bracing sequence to fundamental positions like standing and sitting.
Whether you’re at work, chatting with a friend in the grocery store, or
standing at attention, your basic setup is always the same: feet straight,
back flat, belly tight, head neutral, and shoulders externally rotated in a
stable position.
    Don’t be that guy or gal who stands with arms crossed, shoulders
rolled forward, back slouched, feet angled out, etc. Besides destroying
your squat and running mechanics, it’s not sexy.
    As you can see from the photos, I prefer to place my hands on my
chest because it puts my shoulders in a comfortable yet stable position,
which is what you might consider my active standing position. This is
just a personal preference. With my hands up and in front of my body,
I’m ready to do pretty much anything: I can defend, attack, text,
whatever. But let me be clear: I’m not advocating that you stand around
with your hands on your chest. It’s just one example of an effective
standing position that gives you movement options, which is especially
important if you’re military or law enforcement personnel. You can
position your arms any way you want as long as they are in an
externally rotated, stable position: if your shoulders are internally rotated
(rolled forward) it puts strain on the system, pulling you into a flexed
position.
    The other issue here is that standing with your butt squeezed all day
and keeping your abs tight for prolonged periods of time is impossible.
At some point, your muscles will fatigue, causing you to default into a
weakened position. (No wonder your back is cooked after standing all
day!) The easiest way to take a load off your lumbar spine and reduce
trunk tension is to prop your foot up on something. You still want to
maintain a moderate amount of tension, with the glute of your grounded
leg activated, but placing your foot on a bar or a short stool will reduce
the amount of tension required to keep your pelvis in a neutral position.
You can also lean your butt against a bar stool to give your legs a bit of a

                                     76
rest. The idea is to vary your position often to avoid fatigue, focusing on
staying in a braced-neutral position while you transition from one
position to another. If you’re typing, just bend your arms to about 90-
degrees, and then flip your palms down, rotating from your elbows.
    The takeaway is this: Standing is a technique in and of itself. Just
because you have a workstation that enables you to stand doesn’t make
you immune to muscle stiffness and back pain. Sure, you open up your
hips and turn on the musculature of your legs, but it’s not a cure-all. You
need to practice the bracing sequence and remain conscious of your
position at all times.




                                    77
78
 Stabilizing Your Head And Jaw
 Positioning
      People will do some crazy things with their jaws in an attempt to
 stabilize their head and neck system. For example, if someone is
 surprised or getting ready to take a punch, he’ll clinch his jaw tight.
      What you have to remember is that your jaw is a large open
 circuit right in the middle of a complex and very important kinetic
 chain. To avoid defaulting to a compensated head or neck position
 (i.e., Olympic-lifter yawn), you need a strategy for setting your jaw in
 a good position.
      The general recommendation is this: Relax your face, pin your
 tongue to the roof of your mouth, jamming it behind your teeth, and
 close your jaw. This will allow you to create tension in your jaw
 without clinching, opening your mouth, shortening your neck flexors,
 or compromising breathing mechanics. It’s that simple. There are
 even companies that build specific mouthguards to help facilitate this!



Braced-Neutral Sitting Position
    I have a saying: Sitting is death. Sure, sitting causes muscle
tightness, but that’s not all. Long periods of sitting devour your potential
for peak athletic performance. This is even truer for those who spend
seven to nine hours a day sitting in compromised positions, in chairs
designed primarily for aesthetics, not function. It’s no wonder you feel
like a broken-down mess and experience back pain, shoulder pain, hip
pain, and carpal tunnel agony after sitting on a plane, in a car, or at your
desk at work. You’ve forced yourself into a toxic position that feasts on
athletic potential.

                                     79
    The trouble is, you can’t avoid sitting. It’s an unfortunate construct of
modern society. So the question is: How do you avoid or at least reduce
the havoc wreaked by extended periods of sitting?
    For starters, learn how to sit. Sitting—like standing—is one of the
most technically challenging things we do. Yet most of us are clueless
when it comes to sitting well. In order to stabilize your spine in a neutral
position, you have to get organized while standing by following the
bracing sequence. (Note: A basic understanding of how to box-squat
—see here—also plays a key role in organizing yourself to sit.) Once
seated, you need to keep at least 20 percent tension in your abs to
maintain a rigid spine.




    You’re not limited to just sitting perfectly upright: You can still lean
forward, or lean back while maintaining a braced-neutral spine.

    And herein lies the problem: Keeping your abs engaged at 20 percent
is extremely taxing. All the research indicates that it’s not muscular
strength, but muscular endurance, that dictates loss of spinal position.
(Muscular strength is like doing a one-rep-max back squat, while
muscular endurance is like doing a thirty-rep back squat.) This is why

                                      80
so many people tweak their backs at the end of a run or workout. This
also helps explain why most people collapse into a horribly rounded or
overextended position after only a couple of minutes. It’s more
comfortable and doesn’t require any work. Maintaining a stable position,
on the other hand, takes extreme focus and abdominal endurance.
    The best way to avoid defaulting into a bad position is to stand up and
get reorganized every ten to fifteen minutes. It’s almost impossible to
remain in a good position for anything longer than that. I know—this is a
huge pain in the ass and not always possible. But if you want to heal your
body and reach the performance goals you’re entitled to, you have to do
the work. You have to make sacrifices. So pony up!
    Another helpful strategy is to change your position as often as
possible. What you have to remember is that you don’t need to stay
locked in a sitting position all the time. You can kneel in front of the
computer to open up your hips while answering emails, go for a walk
while talking on the phone, or even stretch while sitting at your desk. The
key is to avoid correcting your posture once you’re already seated.
    The moment you sit down, your glutes go on vacation. This not only
places additional stress on your spine, but also makes it difficult to
stabilize your pelvis in a neutral position. So if you fail to address the
bracing sequence before you sit down, don’t keep your belly tight, or
round or overextend your spine once seated, fixing your position from
your chair is difficult. For example, say you flop down into your favorite
armchair for Super Bowl Sunday and slouch. After the pre-game, you
become aware of how bad your posture is (or just become
uncomfortable) and try to fix it by flattening your back. Although it may
seem as if you’re rectifying the problem, all you’re doing is going from a
flexed position to an overextended one. The same thing happens during a
squat (see butt wink fault, see here) when athletes fail to brace from the
top position. It’s a big thumbs down.



                                    81
     If you find that you’ve rounded forward and try to correct that by
straightening your back, you’ll probably just end up in an overextended
position. Instead, stand up, run through the bracing sequence, and then
sit back down, keeping your back flat and belly tight.

    In addition to getting up and changing your position, you need to work
on restoring function to the tissues that become adaptively short and tight
after long periods of sitting. As a rule, you should mobilize for four
minutes for every thirty minutes of sitting. For example, you could do the
couch stretch—a brutal hip opener you can find on see here—for two
minutes on each side every half hour. The idea is to tackle the areas that
become restricted, specifically your glutes, psoas and other hip flexors,
thoracic spine, hamstrings, and quads (to mention a few). Think of it as
a mobilization penalty based on sitting time.
    Realize that these are just ideas to get you thinking. It doesn’t matter
how much you mobilize, stand up, or change your position, or what kind

                                    82
of chair, keyboard, or mouse you have: if you’re hanging out in a position
that’s compromising your posture, you will continue to experience the
same consequences. That said, getting an ergonomic chair or using
some kind of lumbar support (which is particularly useful during long
car rides) will definitely give your lower back a break and put you into a
more conducive posture.


Abdominal Tension
    As I’ve mentioned, your abs should have some tone all the time. The
minimum tension to maintain a braced-neutral spine for basic standing
and sitting positions is about 20 percent of your peak stiffness. However,
the moment you add dynamic movement or axial load (a force
compressing on your spine), you need to increase abdominal tension or
trunk stiffness to avoid rounding or flexing your back. For example, if
you’re running around the block or doing pushups, you might need about
40 percent trunk stiffness to maintain a good spinal position. But if you’re
going for a max deadlift, you will need 100 percent abdominal tension.
    But perhaps you can’t relate to numbers like 20 percent or 40
percent. You might find it helpful to rate abdominal tension on a scale
from 1 to 10—with one being little to no tension, ten being max tension.
On this scale:

          Sitting in a chair requires a 2 (20 percent).
          Pushups or running around the block requires a 4 (40 percent).
          Max back squat, deadlift, or a 50-meter sprint requires a full 10
          (100 percent).

    In short, the tension necessary to maintain a braced, well-organized
spine largely depends on the action and load on your spine. What you
need to understand is how and when to cycle up to peak stiffness based

                                    83
on the demands of your exercise or activity. A cobra doesn’t cruise
around with its head up and hood flared out all the time: It hits peak
tension when it’s getting ready to strike. Similarly, you don’t want to
walk around with trunk stiffness at a 10 or attempt a high rep, heavy
back squat with abdominal tension at a 2. Knowing how much tension
you need to preserve a braced-neutral position is a skill that requires a
ton of practice. The better you are at this, the less energy and thought
you have to put in to managing abdominal tension. It becomes
instinctual.


 Belly-Whack Test




                                    84
As with the two-hand rule, the belly-whack test is another way to help
bring consciousness to a braced-neutral position and the 20 percent
constant-tension concept. It’s simple: You should always have enough
abdominal tone to take a whack to the belly. We do this at our gym
and around the house. If you’ve got a spongy middle, you get caught
right away.




Breathing Mechanics
                                 85
86
    If you lie on your back and put your hand on your stomach, you
should feel your belly rise and descend as you inhale and exhale. This is
diaphragmatic breathing. When you’re braced correctly, you will
automatically default to this breathing pattern.

    One more thing: As I discussed in the bracing sequence, to create a
braced-neutral position you have to breathe in through your diaphragm,
then engage your abs or stiffen your trunk as you exhale. Maintaining
this diaphragmatic breathing pattern is, however, extremely difficult in
positions that require high tension or an enormous load. What usually
happens when people don’t have a bracing strategy or a model for
getting into a braced-neutral position is that they inhale and the hold their
breathe with their lungs full of air, which is not only ineffective, but
costly.




                                     87
88
   If you’re keeping your belly tight, but not diaphragmatic breathing,
your breath will be confined to your chest and neck.

    Imagine taking in a huge breath and then stiffening your trunk with all
that air trapped inside. Do you think you could perform a high-rep back
squat while keeping your spine rigid? Better yet, could you take a punch
to the belly? Not a chance in hell. It’s like this: You can use your
diaphragm to stabilize your trunk, but the moment you have to breathe,
you surrender your spinal position. So it might work for a max-effort
deadlift, but you’re doomed after your first rep or the moment you have
to breathe. You can imagine how this bracing strategy will play out when
you do anything highly aerobic. With your diaphragm jammed down to
stabilize your spine, you have only one breathing option, and that is to
breathe using only your neck and chest. Now you’re reduced to taking
very shallow breaths, which will restrict respiration and make it difficult
for you to create and maintain stability. It is perilously incorrect.
    This is why it’s so important to do, say, high-rep back squats and lift
heavy objects while under cardiorespiratory stress. In addition to
challenging your capacity to maintain a rigid position while breathing
hard, it mimics the realities of the real-life scenarios we face as
athletes, soldiers, and firefighters. Having said that, let me caution those
of you who are coaches: It’s best to stick to low-risk tests when you
teach these concepts to novice athletes. One good way to find out
whether an athlete can breathe while maintaining a rigid spine is to have
him perform the active straight-leg test (which follows). Make sure he
can get braced and breathe through his diaphragm before you introduce
more complex, heavily loaded movements.




                                    89
Active Straight-Leg Test




                  90
91
    To correctly execute this test, lie on the ground and go through the
bracing sequence here. Next, lift one leg off the ground at a time (you
can use the two-hand-rule principle), and then both legs. You will
notice that with each subsequent step, you have to increase the level
of tension in your glutes and abs in order to maintain a neutral spinal
position. Again, this is an excellent way to test the fluency of your
bracing strategy.
    In addition, the active straight-leg test really helps illuminate the
role your glutes play in keeping a neutral spinal position: if you lie on
your back and raise your legs off the ground with your butt offline, you
will immediately default into an overextended position.

        1. Lie on your back. Squeeze your butt, pull your legs
           together, and point your toes. Then take in a big breath and
           get your belly tight as you exhale. Think about stiffening
           your belly around your spine as you let out air. An
           important distinction worth noting here is I’m not telling you
           to push your low back into the ground. The key is to
           squeeze your butt and then engage your abs to lock in a
           neutral spinal position.
        2. Keeping your toes pointed, legs straight, and your lower
           back flush with the ground, raise your left leg. It’s important
           to note that by pointing your toes, it makes it easier to
           activate your glutes.
        3. Next, raise your opposite leg off the ground. Again, there
           should be no change in spinal position.
        4. To increase stabilization demand, raise both legs off the
           ground.

Spinal-Flinch Fault
                                   92
93
      If there is a change in spinal position—whether it’s a global arch,
 an anterior pelvic tilt, or a ribcage spinal flinch (in which the ribcage
 tilts back)—chances are good that you failed to squeeze your butt and
 tighten your belly. If that happens, readdress the bracing sequence.

    Now, it’s important to understand that if you’re bracing correctly—
meaning that your belly is tight and your spine is neutral—you don’t need
to put a conscious effort into breathing through your diaphragm. It’s a
self-regulating system. Breathing through your diaphragm is the most
effective way to preserve a stable position, plain and simple.
    For example, if you watch elite gymnasts in moments of peak
tension or strongmen under enormous loads, they will take short,
concise breaths through their diaphragm—diaphragmatic gasps—and
reconstitute trunk stiffness every time they exhale. They never lose
spinal stiffness, disengage their abdomen, or stop breathing through their
diaphragm. Rather, they keep their trunk stiff while continuing to breathe
into that compressed system: take a short breath in, exhale into tension,
take a short breath in, and exhale into tension, all while keeping the belly
tight. It’s important to note that when you’re in full kickass mode, you will
inevitably use your sternum and chest to help facilitate breathing, but as
long as you prioritize bracing and diaphragmatic breathing, your body
will take care of the rest.
    The same pattern applies to all sports: When we restore position, we
restore function. When we improve position, we improve function.




                                     94
                             CHAPTER 3
                  ONE-JOINT RULE

     When I teach seminars to a new group of athletes, coach someone
for the first time, or rehab an athlete coming off an injury, I always start
with the bracing sequence (see here). It’s the first and most important
step in rebuilding and ingraining functional motor patterns, optimizing
movement efficiency, maximizing force production, and preventing
injury.
     The problem is not necessarily getting athletes to prioritize spinal
mechanics. Rather, it is getting them to preserve a stable, well-
organized trunk during complex, loaded athletic movements. In fact,
most athletes grasp the midline-stabilization/spinal-mechanics concept
and have no trouble applying the bracing sequence to fundamental static
positions. It’s not until you ask them to change shapes while maintaining
a neutral spinal—hinge from their hips, move from their shoulders, or
set up in an unfamiliar position—that the glaring flaws in their bracing
strategy become apparent.
     The majority of human movements—specifically formal training
exercises—require you to create and maintain spinal stiffness through a
full range-of-motion. In other words, you should be able to lower into the
bottom of the squat, press a barbell overhead, and set up for a deadlift
without defaulting into a broken spinal position (characterized by spinal
flexion or extension fault). And this is where a lot of athletes start to have
problems. Either they can’t keep their spine rigid at the end-range
positions because they are missing range-of-motion, or they don’t have
the motor-control to preserve spinal stiffness through range. Think of the
athlete setting up for a deadlift who can’t help rounding his shoulders. If

                                     95
he’s missing range-of-motion in his hamstrings as he hinges from his
hips (he’s reached his end-range position), he will have to compensate
by rounding forward to grab the bar. Conversely, if he doesn’t have the
strength or doesn’t know how to perform the lift correctly (motor-
control), chances are that he will default into a rounded position. This is
why it’s helpful to show athletes the bracing sequence, and then
challenge their organizational strategy with basic movements.
     There are two really easy ways to do this. The first is to have them
raise their arms overhead—either from the standing position or while
lying down—and the second is to have them bend over and touch their
toes.
     The former expresses movement through their shoulders, while the
latter requires them to hinge from their hips. If they default into an
overextended or rounded position, it’s a clear indication that they made a
setup or movement error.




                                    96
97
    Remember, your spine is not meant to handle loaded flexed or
extended positions. The musculature is designed to create stiffness so
that you can effectively transmit energy to the primary engines of your
hips and shoulders. If you don’t preserve trunk stiffness while moving
from your hips and shoulders, you will lose power and force. This is the
basis of the one-joint rule: you should see flexion and extension
movement happen only at the hips and shoulders, not your spine.
    It’s important to realize that your hips and shoulders function in much
the same way—hence the one-joint rule. They are both ball-in-socket
joints; they both have a ton of rotational capacity; and both are designed
to handle freakish amounts of flexion and extension load.
    Consider men’s rings gymnastics. The athlete locks out his wrists
and elbows and then moves his shoulders in all directions while keeping
his whole body stiff.
    Although the parameters are simple, the degree of shoulder strength,
trunk stability, and motor-control required is mind-boggling. That’s why
only a few people in the world can pull off a legitimate iron cross.
    When thinking about it like this, you can see how the one-joint rule is
really just an extension of the two-hand-rule principle. That is, if you see
flexion or extension anywhere in the spine, it’s an error. This gives
coaches a really easy template for spotting spinal faults. Anytime you
see an athlete’s spine change shape during a movement, you
automatically know that: a) he didn’t set up correctly, or b) he doesn’t
have the motor-control or mobility to get into or maintain the correct
position.
    No doubt, managing an organized spine during loaded athletic
movements is very difficult. Keeping your back flat during a heavy
deadlift, overhead press, or squat is no joke. It takes humongous motor-
control and a keen understanding of how these systems work.
    And here’s the rub: It doesn’t matter how strong you are; if you’re a
big, floppy mess or your technique is not up to par, you will leak power,
bleed force, and dump torque from the system.

                                    98
    The majority of human movements require that you keep your spine
in a neutral position through the entire range-of-motion. If you are
performing a pushup, for example, movement should occur in the
shoulders and elbows, not in the spine.



                                 99
   If you are performing the squat, movement should occur in your hips
and knees. Again, there should be no movement in your spinal system.



                                 100
Braced Spinal Extension and Flexion
     A braced-neutral spine is always ideal for the majority of human
movements—squatting, pulling, running, jumping, and so forth.
However, there are situations when assuming a flat-back position is
impossible. For example, if you have to lift a keg, a massive stone, or a
super heavy, awkward object, good luck trying to get into anything but a
braced-rounded or braced-extended position. Is it ideal? No way. It is
technically a compromised position, but it’s the only position that works
in these circumstances. And you need to be able to pick up heavy,
awkward objects and not mess up your back. It’s part of being a fully
functional human being.
     To avoid injury and optimize position, it is critical that you pay
attention to the details. When you lift something from a braced-flexed or
braced-extended position, you have to brace in that arched position and
maintain that position through the full range of the movement. And this is
where people get confused. Braced flexion or extension is characterized
with a greater global arch, usually in the thoracic spine. Arching does not
represent a loss of position; arching is bracing against your neutral
spine.
     All the same rules apply. You’re still not changing your spinal
position under load or during the movement, and you’re not committing a
local extension fault (see here). Rather, your spine is braced and stable
in a slightly flexed or extended thoracic arched position at the start, and
you maintain that fixed shape throughout range. The thoracic spine is
able to handle braced flexion loads better than the lumbar spine.




                                   101
102
    If you examine the photos, you’ll notice that there is a global arch in
my upper back. I get braced against the object and maintain that position
as I lift the keg off the ground. The same rules apply to extension. If you
have to load something onto your chest and then lift it overhead, focus on
keeping your butt squeezed to stabilize your lower back and maintain the

                                   103
deviation away from a perfectly setup spine.


Global Spinal Extension and Flexion
    There are other situations that require an athlete to flex and extend
into globally arched positions. After all, you can’t move around with your
spine stiff and straight all the time. In order to perform the dynamic
actions of sport, you need to be able to create flexion and extension
throughout the entire system. Imagine a volleyball player’s spike, a
tennis player’s serve, or a pitcher throwing a 100 mph fastball. In all
these movements, the athletes are essentially using the spine as a whip,
creating a global opening and closing, or flexing and extending,
throughout the entire spinal system.
    As with braced extension and braced flexion, these positions are
expressed as a continuum of flexion and extension throughout the entire
spine. There is rarely axial load on your spine, and you’re not flexing or
extending at a single joint (committing a local extension fault). So when
someone tumbles, summersaults, or does a back flip, we’re seeing a
global arch, which is very challenging. This is why doing the cobra pose
in yoga is so difficult—it entails extending to create a global arch. It’s no
wonder that most people extend at only one or two segments of their
lumbar or cervical spine. It’s easier.
    Although it’s difficult to teach these globally extended and flexed,
dynamic, violent, stable, high-speed positions, there are things that you
can do in the gym to help develop motor-control and highlight the
mobility dysfunction that may prevent you from getting into the ideal
positions when it matters most. This is why it’s useful to implement
movements like the kipping pull-up (see here): it not only teaches you
how to create dynamic, globally arched positions, but it also ensures full
range-of-motion in your spine. Even having someone swing from the bar
can be used as a diagnostic. If you can’t get into these large global
shapes, you should ask a very important question: What’s going on?

                                    104
105
106
107
                            CHAPTER 4
                LAWS OF TORQUE

TORQUE: Something that produces or tends to produce torsion
or rotation; the moment of a force or system of forces tending to
cause rotation.


    Watch a video of a powerlifter setting up underneath a bar loaded
with 800-pounds to perform a squat. Although he might look as if he has
the raw power capacity of a class 8 tow truck, you will notice that his
form is precise. He hinges from the hips, keeps his abs tight and his
back as flat as humanly possible. He doesn’t lose position, wobble, or
make compensations. The primal expression on his face and his
monstrous body might suggest that he is capable of just about any
superhuman lifting feat, but he knows that things can go terribly wrong in
an instant, and with 800-pounds perched on his shoulders, not
completing the lift could be the least of his worries. In order to move
such a staggering amount of weight, he must channel the strongman’s
magic ingredient—torque. It must flow through him like a supercharged
magnetic field.
    There is no getting around the laws of torque. This principle of
movement is bedrock to all safe, high-yield athletic movements.
    Torque gives the powerlifter the ability to minimize the variability in
movement. If there is no torque, there will be instability. And if there is
instability, things get ugly quickly. The ankles and knees will collapse
inward, the hips will wobble, the spine will bend, and the shoulders will
round into an unstable position. It’s a recipe for disaster.
    Although the idea of torque has long been part of the lifting and

                                   108
athletic movement conversation, it hasn’t been so identified, nor, to my
knowledge, has anyone drawn on physics to explain its benefits. Even
Pavel Tsatsouline—a top fitness instructor who is commonly referred to
as the “king of the kettlebells”—wrote about screwing your hands into
the ground and spreading the floor with your feet in his book Power to the
People! And coaches still use these cues, but no one calls it what it is.
     We’re not going to mince words. We’re calling this “strongman’s
magic ingredient” by its proper name: torque. Consider it a new weapon
to think about, practice with, and master so that you can grab more and
more performance as you apply it to anything and everything athletic.
While we’re at it, let’s add something else to the strength-and-
conditioning conversation by explaining “why” we do it in the first place.
     Again, it all boils down to stability.
     Let me be clear: Global stability is achieved by creating an
organized, stable framework for your carriage, by hinging from your
primary engines, and by generating a torsion force through your
extremities. In other words, midline stabilization and torque are two
parts of a unifying system that work in conjunction with each other. If you
don’t have an organized carriage, you can’t generate torque or transmit
force to your primary engines. Conversely, if you don’t generate enough
torque, you can’t stabilize your trunk in a good position.


 Strength-and-Conditioning Movement
 Cues
 Universal cues for creating a stable hip position:
           Screw your feet into the ground.
            Spin your feet as if they are on dinner plates.
            Spread the floor.

                                   109
           Shove your knees out.

Universal cues for creating a stable shoulder position:
          Break (bend) the bar.
           Keep your elbows in.
           Armpits forward (when pressing overhead).
           Elbow pits forward (when doing a pushup).

    These common strength-and-conditioning cues remind us of two
things: 1) that our bodies are set up for rotation, and 2) that we need to
generate a rotational force in order to create stable positions from
which to move.




                                   110
111
I’m using an African shillelagh (club) as a model for both the femur and
humerus.

     As I mentioned in the “One-Joint Rule” chapter, your hips and
shoulders are ball-in-socket joints that are very similar in design and
function. This is why the cues for creating a stable shoulder are
essentially the same as those for creating a stable hip. Screwing your
feet into the ground stabilizes your hips, while screwing your hands into
the ground stabilizes your shoulders. Exactly why do we need to
generate a rotational force to create stability in our primary engines? It’s
simple. There is slack within these ball-in-socket joints that allows for
full movement of the limb. To make your joint stable, you need to wind
up, twist, and spiral your limb into your hip or shoulder socket. Put
simply, you need to generate torque.




When there is zero torque, there is slack within the joint capsule,
making it impossible to stabilize the joint in a functionally stable position.

   Here is a simple example to help you understand how this works. If
you examine the photos, you’ll notice that I’ve wrapped a rag around the
head of a club, and bundled up the loose cloth in my opposite hand.
While the rag is wrapped snuggly around the head of the club, there is

                                     112
still space around the head, which means it can be pulled and
manipulated in different directions—that also means there can be no
torque (rotation). Now imagine that the club is the head of your femur
(upper-leg bone) or humerus (upper-arm bone), and the rag is the joint
capsule. As long as there is slack in that rag or joint capsule, your
shoulders, hips, and downstream joints will never get into tight, stable
positions. The results are—you guessed it—huge losses in power and
increased risk of injury.




When you add rotation, it takes up all the capsular slack within the
socket, making the joint very tight and stable.

    When you add rotation, it takes up all the capsular slack within the
socket, making the joint very tight and stable. The point is that these
attachments are set up to create torsional stability. This is why it’s so
important to have full rotational range-of-motion in your primary
engines. In fact, you can probably get away with missing a little bit of
flexion and extension range-of-motion, but if you’re missing rotation at
the hip and shoulder, your body will default into structurally stable yet
inefficient positions in terms of biomechanics. For example, when your
shoulders roll forward, your shoulder joint is stable, but you’re in a
compromised position. Creating a rotational force to stabilize the joint is

                                   113
not limited to your hips and shoulders; it applies to your ankles, knees,
elbows, and wrists.
     Let’s examine the structure of your anterior cruciate ligament (ACL).
Your ACL attaches to your femur and tibia (lower-leg bone) and is one of
the major ligaments that cross your knee. Its role is to prevent
independent rotation of your tibia in relation to your femur. Now it’s
important to note that although your shoulders and hips function in much
the same way, your arms have independent rotation capacities at the
elbow (fundamental movements like feeding and grabbing would be
difficult without this feature). Your knee does not: you can’t internally and
externally rotate at your knee as you can at your elbow.
     The takeaway is that the right kind of rotation will set your knee into a
more stable position, dramatically reducing your potential for injury. But
the wrong kind of rotation will put your knee into a disastrous position,
increasing the odds of injury sooner or later.
     To illustrate how this works, cross your right middle finger over your
index finger. (Note, this is a crude model of how your ACL crosses
through your knee joint.)




                                    114
     Next, wrap your left hand around your fingers and externally rotate
your right hand—creating force that tightens your fingers. If you
internally rotate your hand, your fingers loosen and come apart. The
former is the stable position for your knee, the latter the unstable one. It
is this unstable position that can cause the ACL to tear.




   As I mentioned before, if you don’t get into a well-organized stable
position, your body will create tension in the system somewhere else.

                                    115
This is what I refer to as “tension-hunting.” When you start tension-
hunting, you create an open circuit that your body closes down
immediately by defaulting into a bad position. This looks like a spinal
fault, elbows flaring out, or feet and knees collapsing inward. Your body
recognizes instability as a liability, and it would rather close that open
circuit down in the wrong way than leave you all loosey-goosey.


The Two Laws of Torque
    Now that you understand how a well-organized carriage, torque, and
global organization relate to one another, we can start to talk about the
two laws of torque.

           Law #1: To create stability when your legs or arms are in
           flexion, you need to generate an external rotation force.
           Examples: Squat/pulling positions, overhead press, front
           rack.




                                   116
     Flexion and external rotation cover the broad spectrum of human
movements. Squatting, pressing, and pulling all involve flexion and
require external rotation to create stability. Turning the key in the
ignition, screwing in a light bulb, opening a door, and drawing a bow are
all examples of external rotation. This is why being a lefty sucks when
you have to screw or unscrew something. (Internally rotating with your
left hand to tighten a screw is a weak movement.)

                                   117
    Most torque-related strength-and-conditioning cues involve creating
an external rotation force—like screwing your feet or hands into the
ground or breaking the bar.

           Law #2: To create stability when your legs or arms are in
           extension, you need to generate an internal-rotation force.
           Examples: Split-jerk, jumping.




    This law is a little bit tricky because it comes into play in very few
movements. The most obvious example is when you swing your arms
back while jumping, or when your leg tracks behind your body while
walking, running, or doing a split-jerk.
    Another example is when a boxer or fighter throws a cross—a
straight punch with the rear hand. Technically proficient fighters will
screw (internally rotate) their rear foot into the ground as they rotate
their hips and shoulders. With their ankle, knee, and hip in the most
stable position possible, they can effectively harness the energy
traveling through the kinetic chain, maximizing the power of the strike.
    The second rule sometimes confuses people because there are

                                    118
movements in which your shoulders are in extension but your arms are
in flexion—bent at the elbows. The dip, bench press, pushup, and the
arm swing in running, are all examples of this. To stabilize your
shoulders during these movements, you need to generate an external
rotation force.
     Think of it like this: If your arms are straight—elbows locked out
(extension)—behind your body, you create an internal-rotation force. If
they are bent (flexion), you generate an external rotation force.




   Although the anatomical terms of motion are important and you
should understand what they mean, they do not perfectly describe

                                  119
movement in planes of motion. For example, if I try to explain what your
shoulders are doing during a press using academic terms—flexion,
extension, abduction, external rotation, internal rotation—chances are
good that you won’t know what the heck I’m talking about. More
importantly, I can capture only a piece of what is happening. (Planes of
motion don’t tell you anything about midline stability, for example.) But if
I say bench press, pushup, overhead press, squat, deadlift, or clean, you
can start to make the connection because it’s the formal language of how
people move.
    Squatting is just an expression of flexion and external rotation.
Breaking the bar with your hands as you set up for a bench press is
really just creating external rotation torque off the barbell to stabilize
your shoulders, elbows, and wrists. Screwing your feet into the ground
and shoving your knees out during a squat is really just a mechanism for
generating stability in your hip, knee, and ankle. It’s the same
reoccurring theme again and again. And it’s a language that we all speak
and that we can all understand.


Torque Tests
      The two laws of torque give you a general blueprint for generating
stable positions for the primary engines of your body.
      (In “Movement Hierarchy,” Chapter 5, I’ll apply these laws to a
broad spectrum of functional movements. But first, let’s test this
movement principle using two universally transferable movements so
that you can better understand how torque works.)
      To show you how to generate stability in the shoulders and the hips,
I’ll use the pushup to illustrate the former and the squat the latter. It’s
important to realize that these two body-weight movements are more
than just training exercises. They are master blueprints that translate to
all human movements. For example, if you understand how to set up for
a pushup, you have a model for stabilizing your shoulders for anything

                                    120
that requires pressing or pulling. In the same way, if you understand how
to squat correctly, you have a universal model for creating torque and
stability at your hip, knee, and ankle.
    In the following pages, I’ll provide you with a series of tests so that
you can develop the connection between midline stabilization and torque
and also understand how your setup or start position dictates your
capacity to move optimally.


Shoulder-Stability Torque Tests
    When I teach the rules of torque in my seminars, I typically start at
the shoulder and use the pushup as my diagnostic movement. By putting
people into the top of the pushup, I very clearly, very safely, and very
effectively illuminate the two central tenants of stability. People
immediately realize that if they’re disorganized at the trunk, they can’t
get organized at the shoulder. Conversely, if their shoulders are rolling
forward or they can’t lock out their elbows, they struggle to achieve a flat
back.

Pushup Butt-Acuity Test
     The pushup butt-acuity test is the first application of midline
stabilization and torque that I introduce to athletes. To correctly perform
this test, simply get into the pushup start position by making your hands
as parallel as possible—positioning your hands underneath your
shoulders—and pinning your feet together.
     Next, go through the bracing sequence: Squeeze your butt, align your
ribcage over your pelvis, and get your belly tight. The key is to make
sure that your wrists, elbows, and shoulders are aligned and that your
feet are together. A lot of people mistakenly spread their feet apart, not
realizing that they’re just cheating range-of-motion. This makes it
difficult to engage the glutes and stabilize the trunk.
     After you establish a well-organized pushup start position, the next

                                    121
step is to disengage your glutes and then try to maintain a flat back. If
you can sequence multiple full-range pushups, you’ll probably need to do
five to ten pushups—one set with your butt online and the others with it
offline—to get the desired effect.
     What you will find is that the latter setup (glutes offline) is not nearly
as stable because there’s a domino effect: if you glutes are disengaged
you can’t organize your spine in a good position. This turns into a great
opening diagnostic test because it gives you two really important pieces
of information: 1) when your butt is offline, you’re susceptible to spinal
faults; and 2) a broken midline places additional strain on your
shoulders. The difference is shocking.




                                     122
When your butt is squeezed, it’s easier to keep your back flat.




When you disengage your glutes, it’s harder to preserve a neutral spinal
position, especially as you start sequencing together multiple pushups.

Open-Hand Torque Test
    The second test uses one of the most common strength-and-
conditioning cues as it relates specifically to the pushup: screwing your
hands into the ground.
    This is how people really start to understand how important torque is
in stabilizing the trunk. With the pits of your elbows forward and the
heads of your shoulders externally rotated, it’s much easier to keep your
back flat. Moreover, this test also teaches you about the connection

                                   123
between hand position and the amount of torque you can generate.
    After you perform the torque test with your hands parallel (or as
straight as you can get them), the next step is to start spinning your
hands out—keep turning your hands out until you reach the limits of your
external rotation. You do this while trying to cultivate torque and keeping
your back flat in each position. What you will realize is that the more you
turn out your hands, the harder it is to create torque and stabilize your
trunk. Once you get to 45-degrees or farther, cultivating torque is simply
untenable. At this point, your shoulders start to sag and your spine bends
because you’re in such a low-torque environment. If you turn your hands
out as if you were doing a planche (a difficult gymnastics move in which
the entire body is held parallel to the ground—like a high pushup without
using the feet), it becomes even harder to keep the trunk stiff and stable.
To maintain this position with zero torque is very difficult, and explains
why doing a planche pushup, even when your feet are on the ground, is
so difficult. Not only does it take extreme mobility, but also extreme
strength.
    The takeaway is this: In order to create a stable platform for your
shoulders and thoracic spine, you have to create torque through your
hands. If you put your hands in a position in which you can’t create
torque, it’s hard to stabilize and generate force. Remember, we’re not
just talking about the pushup; we’re talking about the entire gamut of
pressing and pulling exercises. Adopting an open-hand position (hands
turned out) in the pushup just ensures that you will adopt the same hand
position when you block, push a car, do a burpee, you name it.




                                   124
125
    Get into the pushup start position. With your fingers pointed straight
head (fingers splayed), screw your hands into the ground. Next, turn
your hands out slightly and try to generate torque. What you will find is
that you can’t create nearly as much torque with your hands turned out.
As you turn your hands out farther, you will completely lose the ability to
cultivate torque, making it a supreme challenge to stabilize your
shoulders and trunk. And if you turn your hands completely backward,
you can’t create any torque at all.

    Note: Screwing your hands into the ground creates external rotation
in your shoulders, but physically externally rotating your hands steals
your ability to generate torque.

Ring-Pushup Torque Test
     If you really want to look under the hood of shoulder stabilization,
have an athlete do pushups on the rings. His understanding of bracing
and torque, or his lack thereof, instantly becomes clear: You can see if
he’s in a good position or bad position because it’s so much harder to
stabilize the shoulders and trunk on the rings.
     The ring-pushup start position also teaches you that you need to
torque early and often. It’s difficult to reclaim torque at the bottom of a
pushup, in the compression phase, particularly on the rings—you have
to arrive with torque. This is why coaches cue athletes to break the bar
at the top of the bench press: It optimizes shoulder position when they
lower the bar to their chest.
     This test helps you understand that if you set yourself up in a good
position with adequate torque and an organized trunk, chances are good
that you will perform the movement with perfect technique. And it turns
out that if you set up properly, a lot of the midrange problems and
discomfort that people experience—shoulder pain during a pushup or
low back pain during a squat—disappear.
     Note: Unlike in the regular pushup where you have a base of

                                    126
support and can screw your hands into the ground to create external
rotation, with the ring-pushup, you have to actually physically externally
rotate your hands. Your right thumb should be at 1 o’clock and your left
thumb at 11 o’clock.




                                   127
Performing the pushup butt acuity test on the rings is an entirely different
ball game than doing it from the ground. The stabilization demands are
much higher, making it a great diagnostic tool for stronger athletes. To
begin, get into a good pushup position, squeezing your butt, engaging
your abdominals, and getting your back flat.




                                    128
The moment you disengage your glutes, you will immediately feel your
hips sag, pulling you into an overextended position.




                                 129
To create torque, you still have to generate an external rotation force. But
unlike performing pushups from the ground, cultivating torque on the
rings is a lot harder. To put your shoulders in a good position, you have
to turn your hands out so that your thumbs are pointing away from your
body. Your right thumb should be at 1 o’clock and your left thumb at 11
o’clock.




If you don’t externally rotate your hands, you can’t create torque. And
when you can’t create torque, you can’t organize your spine, your
elbows flare out, and your shoulders default into a rounded position.


 Torque and Midline Tension
    If your torque and midline tension levels aren’t in sync, or your
 midline stabilization strategy is weak, your spine will sag the moment
 you start applying an external rotation force. Let’s say, for example,

                                    130
that you set up for a pushup with your trunk tension a 2 out of 10 and
you try to apply torque through your hands at a rate of 5: Your spine
will respond by overextending. You need to apply just enough torque to
maintain a flat back. For body-weight movements, you don’t need that
much torque or to keep your belly that tight to maintain good form, but
as you increase load or add speed, you have to increase both torque
and trunk tension to match the demand of the movement.



Hip-Stability Torque Tests




                                 131
132
    Like the pushup, the squat has a broad range of applications. If you
understand how to create torque while squatting, you have a global hip-
stability model that is germane to the vast majority of movements. In
addition, the squat really illustrates that your setup—specifically your
foot position, or stance—dictates your ability to generate torque
upstream: in your ankles, knees, hips, spine, and shoulders.
    Remember, your joints need to be in a position to facilitate rotational
force before you start moving. As the squat torque tests will prove, a
straight foot or neutral foot position is ideal for generating maximum
torque.
    The trouble is that there has been a historical disconnection between
foot position and stabilization through torque. For years coaches have
taught athletes to turn their feet out—like a duck’s—when they squat,
which opens up some room in the hip joint and allows athletes to drive
their knees out farther and lower more easily into the bottom of the
squat.
    What coaches and athletes have failed to realize is that you can
create room in the hip joint through external rotation torque: by
positioning your feet straight (parallel), screwing your feet into the
ground, and shoving your knees out. Although this requires more
mobility, it allows you to maximize torque and still free the head of your
femur.
    However, most people don’t have the range-of-motion required to
perform a full-range, butt-to-ankle squat. Turning the feet out allows
them to get the job done. But that quick fix comes at a cost. In addition to
reducing the ability to generate torque, it instills dysfunctional movement
patterns that carry over to other activities. Squat with a duck-footed
stance and you will stand, walk, jump, land, and pull with a duck-footed
stance.
    And what do you think will happen when you go for a one-rep max
back squat? Or spontaneously receive weight in the bottom of the squat
during an Olympic lift? Or plant to change directions in a basketball

                                    133
game? This is what will happen: You’re going to express the same
movement pattern that has been ingrained in your motor program and
you’re going to dramatically increase your potential for injury. This is the
same as rounding your back when you deadlift. Or even better, smoking
a pack of cigarettes. It’s not a problem until it becomes a problem. And
once it is a problem, correcting it is that much harder.




    Let’s take a closer look at what happens when the feet are turned out.
Most importantly, it makes it difficult to generate torque and stabilize
your body. What often happens as a result is that your ankles collapse
and your knees spiral inward, creating a valgus—twisting and shearing
—force across your joints. This is how athletes dump torque and lose
force through their hips, and it is the primary culprit in ACL tears.
    When I teach neutral foot position as it relates to the squat, I say that
you can squat in any position as long as you can create arches in both

                                    134
feet. If your foot sustains an arch, you will be able to generate sufficient
torque. It just so happens that straight, neutral feet is the best position for
achieving this ideal arch. The more you turn out your feet, the more
likely that your arches will collapse. Simple.
    For example, if an athlete lowers into a squat but reaches the end of
his ankle range-of-motion before he completes the exercise—meaning
that he can’t flex any deeper as he moves into the bottom position—he
has to start tension-hunting by collapsing inward. Although this will
make his ankle structurally stable, it compromises the integrity of his
joints. He is in effect, just depending on his ligaments and tissues to
support him. To ensure optimal positioning of the ankle joint, you need to
create an arch in your foot, which is expressed through external rotation
torque.
    Here’s the deal: While athletes can get away with squatting with their
feet turned out when working with body-weight and low volume, the
moment they increase weight, speed, or volume, the house of cards
collapses.
    As with the shoulder-torque tests, the goal of the subsequent
demonstrations is to drive home the relationship between torque and
midline stability, as well as to illustrate why a neutral foot position is
ideal for maximizing torque.




                                     135
Your arch is largely a phenomenon of this mechanical system—bones,
ligaments, tendons, and connective tissues—derived from the external
rotation of your hip. Heel aligned with the Achilles (straight) is ideal, or
heel cord matching the calf. If your feet are straight and you externally
rotate at the hip, your feet will come into a natural arch. You can lift more
weight and you can jump with more force. Oh, and it also happens to be
the safest position from which to move.




                                    136
This oblique load on the Achilles is one of the mechanisms for Achilles
rupture, Achilles tendinopathy, and ACL tears. One of the ways you can
mitigate off axial oblique loads on the Achilles is to get the foot into a
straighter position.

Open Foot Torque Test
    When I teach people about creating a stable hip position, I start with
the open foot torque test because it’s really easy to make the connection
between a neutral foot position and torque.
    To correctly execute this test, stand with your feet directly under
your hips, or roughly shoulder-width apart, go through the bracing
sequence, and then screw your feet into the ground as if you were trying
to spread the floor apart: create as much external rotation force as

                                   137
possible and squeeze your butt as hard as you can without letting your
big toe come off the ground. When you externally rotate at the hip, your
feet come into an arch—connective tissue contracts, bones are aligned
properly, and the muscles are activated—which is the ideal positioning
for your feet.
    After you carry out the torque test with your feet straight, turn your
feet out about 30-degrees and repeat the process. What you will
experience is that you can’t cultivate the same amount of torque, your
foot won’t come into an arch, and you can’t activate your glutes to the
same degree.
    Now it’s important to mention that you can turn your feet out slightly
—maybe between 15 and 30 degrees—and still generate a sufficient
amount of torque. However, as you venture into the 45-degree range,
there is no torque to be had. The drop off rate in foot position is radical.
    Let me be clear: The more parallel your feet, the more stable your
position. You can turn your feet out slightly and still create torque, not as
much, but some torque. It might not matter so much during body-weight
squats or low-intensity exercise, but once you add a metabolic demand
or load, your inability to generate torque will result in a biomechanical
compromise of some kind. And you must know by now that a
biomechanical compromise is like a green light to injury.




                                     138
Start with your feet parallel, go through the bracing sequence, and then
screw your feet into the ground, creating an external rotation force. You’ll
notice that your shoes curve. This is your feet coming into an arch. Next,
turn your feet out slightly and repeat the process. As your feet venture
outward, you’ll notice that you can’t generate torque, create an arch, or
activate your glutes.


 You Won’t Get Drafted if You Have
 Collapsed Arches …
     While playing for the NFL, my good friend John Welbourn, founder
 of CrossFit Football, had his feet observed by a podiatrist 31 times.
 Why was he checked 31 times? Because a navicular drop, or
 collapsed arch, is a great predictor of ACL tears.


Butt-Acuity Test



                                    139
140
To begin, go through the bracing sequence with your feet as straight as
possible, squeezing your butt as hard as you can. Next, turn your feet out
and do the same thing. What you’ll notice is that you can’t activate your
glutes to stabilize your pelvis, which creates an unstable spine.

    The butt-acuity test helps elucidate the relationship between a
straight-foot stance and your ability to activate your glutes. With your
feet parallel, you can maximize torque and squeeze your butt to stabilize
your pelvis in a neutral position. However, if you turn your feet out, you
not only lose the ability to generate torque, but also you can’t engage
your glutes, which creates an unstable pelvic position.
    As you experienced during the pushup, if you fail to create torque
through your hands or you’re in a position in which you can’t generate a
rotational force, your ribcage tilts. A similar thing happens during the
squat, but instead of your ribcage, your pelvis tilts. If you have zero
torque, you have to create stability some other way. In the squat it’s
created by the pelvis moving forward, which is really the mirror action
of your ribcage tilting back.
    This explains why so many people overextend when they squat and
why people experience so much horrible low back pain. In a low-torque
environment—meaning their body can’t generate any stability—they
default to bone-on-bone stability, which is the lumbar-spine-
overextension fault.


 Patellar Alignment




                                   141
     To generate the most force and to avoid knee pain, your kneecap
 and the insertion of the quad ligament on your shin need to be as
 perpendicular as possible. When you turn your feet out, the quad
 ligament gets pulled off axis. That’s what my hand positions illustrate.
 With your foot straight, your kneecap tracks straight up and down over
 your quad, which is optimal.


Base of Support test
   Another problem with turning your feet out is that you limit your base

                                   142
of support. You go from the full length of your foot to about half,
compromising forward and backward balance and stability. If you squat
with skis on your feet, for example, you would never fall over forward or
backward. But if you turn your feet out, you instantly lose that balance
and stability.
     This is another reason that you see athletes’ knees tracking inward.
It’s not just because they have zero torque; it’s because they have zero
forward and backward stability. In fact, when your feet are straight, your
knees don’t track as far inward even when you fail to create torque (see
torqueless squat test, see here). This loss of stability becomes an even
bigger issue when you Olympic lift.
     For example, say you receive a snatch a little bit out in front or
behind your body. With your feet straight, you can adjust your position
because you have a large base of support. But if your feet are turned out,
regaining your balance is difficult.




When your foot is straight you have a large base of support. When you
turn your foot out, however, you lose around 30 percent of the length of
your foot.


                                   143
Monster-Walk Test
    The monster walk is a common warm-up exercise in which you put
a band above your knees and walk sideways while in a quarter or half
squat. What’s interesting is that people don’t walk with their feet angled
out when they do this drill; their feet are always straight. Why is that?
Because it is impossible to keep your knees from collapsing inward as
you walk laterally. To remain stable, you have to maintain a position that
gives you the most stability, which is accomplished by keeping your feet
straight.




                                   144
Wrap a band just above your knees, parallel your feet, and then reach
your hamstrings and hips back, lowering into a quarter squat. Because
your feet are straight, you can generate more torque and drive your
knees out farther, giving you more balance and stability as you sidestep.



                                  145
When you attempt this exercise with an open foot stance, you can’t
generate enough torque to drive your knees out. The band literally pulls
your knees together. This makes it difficult to get into a stable position
and maintain balance as you sidestep.


                                    146
Monster-Squat Test
    Squatting with a band wrapped around your knees is another
illuminating test. Again, when your feet are straight, it’s easier to
generate torque and drive your knees out. The moment you adopt a duck
stance and squat, on the other hand, it becomes a lot harder to drive your
knees out. It just feels like a less stable, weak position. And the band
does a really good job of highlighting that fact.




                                   147
With your feet parallel, it’s easier to counter the pressure of the band and
squat in a good position.



                                    148
When you squat from an open foot stance, you can’t generate sufficient
torque and drive your knees out to counter the band’s resistance.

Stable Foot Position Test
   This test helps to illustrate that with your feet straight, you don’t need

                                    149
to drive your knees out that far to achieve ankle stability. However, the
more you turn your foot out, the farther out you have to drive your knees
to achieve that natural arch and stable ankle position, which at a certain
point becomes unattainable.




                                   150
Place your foot in a neutral position and then drive your knee out. Notice
that I have to push my knee out only slightly to create a natural arch.




                                   151
Next, turn your foot out and then drive your knee out until your foot
comes into an arch. As you can see from the photo, you have to drive
your knee out a lot farther to achieve that arch.

External Rotation Test
    This test illustrates xsthe amount of external rotation you can create
at your hip with your feet parallel, as well as how limited the range-of-
motion in your hip is with your feet turned out.




                                   152
Sit in a chair, position your feet straight, and pull your foot toward your
opposite hip. This is an expression of hip external rotation.


                                     153
Next, turn your foot out and do the same thing. What you will find is that
you can’t lift your foot as high or create as much external rotation at your
hip.


                                    154
Torqueless-Squat Test (Ankle-Collapse Test)
    Keeping your feet straight limits end-range valgus collapse, while
turning the feet out increases valgus collapse. You can test this in one of
two ways: Either squat with your feet straight and then with them turned
out without creating any torque, or sit on a chair and simply drive your
knee inward with your foot straight and then again with your foot turned
out. The latter test is much easier, but you should try both to see how
they feel and then imagine being in these positions under a seriously
heavy load or while sprinting down a field and then changing directions.
    The bottom line is you need to be able to survive a bad position, just
in case the load is too heavy or you make a mechanical or motor-control
error. It happens. But if you’re in a good position, you can at least
mitigate the negative outcome.




                                   155
When your feet are straight, you can kind of mitigate the valgus force on
your ankle and knee when you fail to create torque during a squat. It’s
also easier to keep your shins vertical and maintain balance because
you have a larger base of support.




                                   156
With your feet turned out, your ankles collapse to a much greater
degree. Get into this position, and the sketchiness of this valgus force
will become immediately apparent.

Ankle-Collapse Test




                                   157
Sit in a chair with your toes pointed forward and try to collapse your
arches.




                                   158
Next, turn your foot out and collapse your arch. As you can see from the
photos, it’s a much more dramatic collapse.




                                  159
160
                            CHAPTER 5
         MOVEMENT HIERARCHY

    I’m betting that this is you and that this is what you want:
    You want to move efficiently. You want to produce more force. You
want to maximize power output. You also want to resolve pain and injury
issues, or even better, prevent them.
    To do all this—as I said earlier—you need to focus on three
movement principles: midline stabilization and organization, one joint
body, and the laws of torque. Let’s consider two questions first:

           Can you brace your spine in a stable, well-organized
           position?

           Do you understand how to load and create torque through the
           primary engines of your hips and shoulders?

    Simple concepts, right? The hard part is putting them to work in a
safe and controlled environment like the gym so that you can go out and
apply them where it matters the most, in play, dance, sports, training, or
combat.
    As I’ve already mentioned, learning a strength-and-conditioning
system gives you a universal language for human movement. That is, if
you’re fluent in full-range functional movements—squatting, pressing,
pulling, etc.—you have universal models for moving safely and
effectively.
    For example, if you understand the principles that govern a deadlift,

                                   161
you have embodied the knowledge to safely and efficiently pick anything
up off the ground. If you can correctly perform a push-press or squat,
you understand how to jump and land with your torso upright—like when
you rebound a basketball—without destroying your knees. If you can
stabilize your shoulders during a pull-up, you will have no trouble
creating that same stable shoulder position while climbing a tree or rock
wall.
     But here’s the crux of the problem: Just because you can complete
or perform functional movements in the gym doesn’t mean you can
apply them somewhere else. You can do a pull-up in the gym, for
example, but that doesn’t mean you can climb a tree. However, if you
understand what is going on when you do a pull-up, it’s easy to climb a
tree because you already know how to create torque and trunk stability.
So as long as you understand how the movement principles work and
you develop reproducible motor-control patterns, you have a model for
reconstituting organized, stable, and efficient positions in any
environment. Whether you’re wind surfing, shooting, fighting, dancing, or
playing football, you have a transferable template for moving that is both
safe and effective.
     But human movement is complex. To ingrain functional movement
patterns that have universal application, you need an all-encompassing
strength-and-conditioning blueprint that translates to all forms of human
movement. In addition, you need a model for identifying and resolving
dysfunctional movement patterns, unstable positions, and range-of-
motion restrictions that kill athletic performance and increase potential
for injury and pain.
     The movement hierarchy serves as this blueprint. It’s a way to
categorize movement so that you have a model for:

           Rehabbing an athlete after surgery or injury.
           Layering movements and skill progressions.
           Understanding movement complexity.

                                   162
           Illuminating movement errors.
           Identifying mobility restrictions.


Skill Progressions and Movement
Complexity
     Your brain is wired for movement, not musculature. It doesn’t think
quads; it doesn’t think hamstrings. It thinks movement. However, we
still need to teach people how to move because, as I said, human
movement is complex. We teach kids how to brush their teeth, even
though putting the hand to the face is a natural movement. And we teach
athletes how to run, deadlift, and squat with proper technique, even
though running, squatting, and picking something off the ground is innate.
The trick is teaching and layering movements and skill progressions in
a way that shortens the learning curve, accelerates athletic
performance, and highlights weaknesses in movement and mobility.
     When I first started thinking about skill progressions and movement
complexity, I looked at it through a rehabilitation lens. I asked myself,
How do I rebuild functional movement patterns after injury or surgery?
More specifically, how do I layer movement progressions within the
framework of strength-and-conditioning that will instill good, transferable
motor-control patterning?
     Here’s what I did: First, I introduced the three movement principles. I
then applied them to basic, scalable full-range movements like
squatting, deadlifting, pushups, pull-ups and so forth.
     If an athlete showed physical competency with the basic
movements, I would start to challenge the stability of his positions by
adding load and metabolic demand, and then by introducing more upright
positions. For example, if I had an athlete who could back squat with
good form, I might introduce the front squat or overhead squat, or simply
have him run around the block—to get his heart rate up—and then

                                    163
perform multiple back squat repetitions.


 Default Movement
     As I’ve said before, the positions that you assume at work or while
 going about your life will impact the way you move in the gym: If you
 walk around with your back overextended, chances are good that you
 will default into that same position while squatting. The environment
 also affects movement efficiency. For example, last year I noticed that
 my oldest daughter’s first grade classmates started to heel-strike
 (landing on your heel is less than optimal when running and can lead
 to a ton of problems). They didn’t seem to do this in kindergarten.
 What happened?
     Well, they had been wearing cushioned shoes and sitting in a chair
 long enough to create an adaptation, and it turned into their default
 movement pattern. This is why it’s so important and difficult to get to
 the root of movement issues, and take the time to reverse engineer
 patterns that have been hardwired over years of conditioning. If you sit
 in a chair, you have to spend extra time working on your posture. If
 you wear high heels, you have to focus on your foot position and calf
 mobility. Remember, biomechanical pathologies are treatable at any
 time or stage of development. But it takes time, consciousness, and a
 ton of practice. It starts with understanding the movement principles
 and then practicing and applying them to every facet of your life.

     The final step was to challenge the athlete’s motor-control and test
his mobility. I did this by adding a speed element and layering
transitional movements like Olympic lifts and burpees. What I realized
is that by systematically layering movements, I could not only rehab an
injured athlete, but also progress movements—from basic to more
advanced exercises—for the novice or elite athlete. This basic template

                                   164
not only allowed me to ingrain good (and transferable) movement
patterning, but also to illuminate common movement faults and
limitations in range-of-motion.
    I’ll use the squat as an example. Say you’re teaching an athlete how
to squat and you notice that his knees cave in (valgus knee fault, see
here) as he moves into the bottom position. This fault tells you that either
he doesn’t understand how to correctly perform the squat—to create
torque by screwing his feet into the ground or driving his knees out—or
he is unable to get into the correct position because he’s missing range-
of-motion somewhere. It’s also an indication that he will exhibit this
same fault during more complex, heavier-loaded movements: if an
athlete rolls his knees in during a body-weight squat, chances are good
that this same fault will rear its ugly head when he jumps and lands. It’s
no wonder so many middle-aged men get injured playing basketball!
    The idea is to identify movement faults and mobility restrictions in an
environment where the athlete’s chances of getting hurt are minimized.
To make continual improvements, you need to be able to scale,
progress, and constantly test that athlete’s motor-control and mobility.
To do that, the coach and the athlete needs to understand “how” to
correctly perform the movement, as well as “why” some movements
are more complex than others. Imagine having someone perform
snatches early in their ACL surgery rehab. That would be silly, if not
surreal. Similarly, you wouldn’t show someone a full snatch without first
introducing an overhead squat and snatch balance.


 Movement Mobility Template
     Whether it’s a valgus knee fault or another movement error, the
 template for teaching and correcting dysfunctional positions and
 movement patterns is the same: Prioritize technique (motor-control)
 first, and then if the athlete can’t physically get into a good position,


                                    165
use mobility to improve position and function.

          Technique: Always address motor-control first. Make sure
          you understand how to correctly perform the movement and
          get into the right position without making a load sequencing
          error (i.e., failing to brace or create torque).

          Mobility: If you are physically unable to assume a stable
          position because you are missing range-of-motion (i.e., you
          can’t drive your knees out because your quads are tight),
          then address mobility, targeting the areas that are restricting
          your movement.

     In the technique portion of this chapter, I highlight common faults
associated with specific training movements. To improve your
understanding of how this template works, I offer tips on how to
correct the motor-control error. I also offer mobility prescriptions. If
you’re an athlete, having a coach help you spot and correct these
fundamental faults is ideal.
     It’s important to note that the mobility prescriptions offered are
vague due to the complex nature of tissue restriction. Every athlete is
different and has unique issues that contribute to a limited range-of-
motion. It’s a system of systems. Your tight quads might prevent you
from getting your knees out, but the cause could also be your tacked-
down heel cords, tight hamstrings, or brutally stiff adductors (to
mention a few possibilities). For these reasons, the mobilization
target areas, which refer to subsection contained within the Systems
chapter, are simply to get you moving in the right direction. It will take
time and a ton of experimenting to get to the bottom of your mobility

                                   166
 restrictions. If there are several target areas listed, the best approach
 is to systematically address the areas that might be limiting your
 range-of-motion using the test and retest model. To learn more about
 how to treat range-of-motion restrictions, visit chapter 7, “The
 Systems,” which starts on see here.

    Whether you’re rehabbing someone, progressing a beginner, or
coaching an elite athlete, the movement hierarchy is a universally
applicable template that allows you to systematically highlight motor-
control and range-of-motion issues, as well as safely and effectively
challenge the athlete with movement stimulus aimed at improving
performance and eradicating pain.
    I’ve broken down movements into three categories based on
stabilization and speed demands. It’s important to realize that the
movements featured in this chapter just scratch the surface of
transferable training exercises that you can and should implement. My
goal is to provide you with the key ingredients so that you can start to
connect the dots between the movement principles covered in this book
and the full-range strength-and-conditioning movements that are
performed in the gym/lab.


Category 1 Movements
    Category 1 movements represent basic squatting, pressing, and
pulling techniques: air squat, back squat, front squat, overhead squat,
pushup, bench press, overhead press, and deadlift.
    Movements that fall into this category have relatively low speed
demands, express normal or full ranges of motion, and closely
resemble the actions of daily life, like picking something up off the
ground. Category 1 movements allow you to create and maintain torque
through the full range of the movement. For these reasons, category 1

                                    167
movements—specifically the squat, deadlift, pushup, and strict-press—
serve two primary purposes. First, they enable you to start to layer and
instill good movement practices into motor programs. Second, they
serve as the primary diagnostic tools for assessing motor-control and
mobility dysfunction.
    All of these exercises share a common sequence: They start in a
position of high stability (PHS)—meaning a braced-neutral position that
can maximize torque in the hips and/or shoulders—and maintain that
stable position throughout the entire range-of-motion.




         Position of High Stability (PHS): A braced, well-organized
         position that allows you to create and maintain maximum
         stability through your hips and shoulders.
         Connection: Maintaining a torsion force through the entire
         range-of-motion.

    Let’s use the air squat to discuss this. You begin in a PHS (top
position), lower your body into a squat (bottom position), and finish the
movement in the same PHS (top position). You go from one shape, to
another shape, back into the original shape. Because your feet remain in
contact with the ground throughout the entire movement, you can
maintain a torsion force through the entire range of the movement. It is
this torsion force that keeps you connected to the movement.




                                  168
Category 2 Movements
    As with category 1 movements, category 2 movements take you
from a PHS to a PHS. But instead of maintaining torque throughout the
entire range of the movement, you insert a speed element—jumping and
landing, wall ball, snatch balance, running, rowing, etc.—between
beginning and end.




                                169
     Jumping and landing is a perfect example of this. You start in a PHS,
you remove connection (torque) as you jump off the box, and then you
have to spontaneously stabilize your spine, screw your feet into the
ground, and drive your knees out to finish in a PHS. You still start and
finish in the same position, but by removing your torsion force and
adding speed—jumping in the air—you increase the motor-control and
mobility demands of the movement.
     What you will find is that it is a lot harder to hide weaknesses as you
progress into category 2 movements.
     People can disguise their movement dysfunction and mobility
restrictions behind the veil of category 1 movements, so you have to
constantly challenge their motor-control and range-of-motion capacities.
For example, you might find that you can perform, say, a squat with
good form, but the moment you take that squat position to an elevated
platform and jump off it, everything unravels: feet turn out, ankles

                                    170
collapse, knees cave inward, lumbar spine overextends.
    To improve as an athlete, you have to work very hard to find
weaknesses in your movement profile. It’s not enough to move fast, lift
heavy, or perform high-repetitions within category 1. As you move
closer to the actions of sports, you need to be able to spontaneously
arrive in a safe and stable position. Your tissues are not normal unless
they’re capable of moving quickly while remaining stable at end-range.


Category 3 Movements
    Category 3 movements closely resemble the actions of sports. This
means changing direction: going from a pull to a push/press, cutting,
jumping and then landing in a different position, etc. The formal definition
of a category 3 movement is to start in one position, remove the
connection (torque), and arrive in a completely different position. Put
another way, an athlete needs to be able to spontaneously generate
stability while changing position or direction.




                                    171
    One of the most difficult and easily recognizable category 3
movements performed in the gym is the snatch. As you can see from
the photos, you start in a pulling position, open your hips into full
extension, and then drop into the bottom of the squat with your arms
overhead. As the bar travels upward, there is a moment of

                                  172
weightlessness when you lose torque with the ground and the bar: This
is the position of transition and where you lose connection (you
momentarily lose torque). Receiving the weight in the bottom of the
overhead squat is your PHS. You go from one shape, which is a position
of transition (a pulling position), remove the connection, and then arrive
in a completely different shape, in the overhead squat, or PHS.
     As with category 2 movements, when you expose athletes or you
start implementing these full-range movements, technique falls apart.
The simple fact is that these changes of direction are very challenging.
You can’t disguise poor movement patterns or limited ranges of motion.
And that’s the goal. Remember, to ensure continual growth, you need to
hunt down all your motor-control and mobility issues, expose them, and
then work on fixing them.
     The bottom line is that you need to train category 1 movements like
power lifts (squat, deadlift, bench press) to layer the fundamental
movement principles. But if you want to improve athleticism and really
highlight an athlete’s understanding of midline stabilization and torque,
you need to expose her to category 3 movements like Olympic lifts.


Upright-Torso Demands
    The orientation or verticality of your torso is another way to
categorize complex movements within the framework of the movement
hierarchy. It’s really simple: The more upright the torso, the more
motor-control, range-of-motion, and stabilization required to carry out
the movement.




                                   173
    The squat variations present perhaps the best examples of how an
upright torso increases the difficulty of a movement. For instance, the
back squat is the simplest of the variants because it has relatively low
upright-torso demands. You can tilt your torso slightly forward, giving
your hips, hamstrings, and ankles some room to breathe. But if you
increase the verticality of your torso in the form of a front squat, right
away you will start to see weaknesses in your athletic profile. You will
have a much harder time keeping your back flat, your knees out, and
your shins perpendicular. The overhead squat is the toughest of the
squat iterations because you have to keep your torso perfectly upright to
avoid defaulting into an unfavorable position.
    Although each squat variation requires you to stabilize the barbell
and organize your shoulders in a different position, the orientation of your
torso adds to the difficulty of the lift. Even having an athlete do a high-bar
back squat (squat with the torso upright) in place of a low-bar back squat
(squat with the torso tilted forward) creates new challenges in terms of
motor-control and mobility.
    When I teach my Movement and Mobility Seminars, I highlight this
concept by asking those in attendance to go through a three-squat series.

                                     174
    First, I ask them to perform a body-weight squat. I never specify
what kind of squat, just that they squat with their back flat and shins
vertical. Without fail, everyone always shows me a close iteration of an
unweighted back squat because it’s the easiest of all the squats as you
can tilt your torso forward and descend into the bottom position without
compromising form.

                                  175
    Next, I’ll ask them to put their hands behind their heads, which forces
their torsos into a more upright position, and squat again. This is the
equivalent of going from a back squat to a front squat. At this point,
people will start to struggle to keep their backs flat and shins vertical. To
stay integrated, they have to increase tension in their trunk and drive

                                    176
their knees out a little bit farther to correctly execute the movement,
resulting in a lot more faults.




                                    177
178
    The last thing I’ll ask them to do is squat with their arms locked
overhead, which is essentially an unweighted overhead squat. And this
is where people start defaulting into some pretty wonky positions to keep
their torsos upright, shins vertical, and arms overhead. Obviously, you
can still tilt your torso forward while keeping your hands overhead.
However, to get the most out of this exercise, you need to increase the
verticality of your torso with each subsequent squat.

     This three-squat series turns into a really simple category 1
movement template for spotting problems and challenging the athlete
with higher degrees of motor-control and mobility.
     Whether you’re layering on exercises to rehab an athlete post-injury
or after surgery, or trying to expose restrictions in a beginner or elite
athlete’s mobility and technique, skill progressions and movement
complexity become easy if you understand the upright-torso demands
principle and the movement hierarchy. You should be able to identify
basic universal shapes of stability. You should also be able to spot
movement faults and understand what it is happening and know how to
fix it. Finally, you should be able to teach and incorporate transferable,
full-range strength-and-conditioning movements in a way that instills
good movement patterning for athletes of all ability levels.


 MWOD FIGHT CLUB DRILL
     The goal is to equip you with the knowledge to correct movement
 faults and address your own range-of-motion problems. However,
 that doesn’t mean you do it alone; having someone analyze your
 movement and keep you honest is key. You’re way more likely to pay
 attention to your foot position when you stand and your posture when
 you sit if someone else is holding you accountable. You need a coach,
 and you need a training partner, people who understand this material
 and will call you out when you’re hanging out in lousy positions or

                                   179
moving poorly. You need someone who will offer tips on how to
correct the problem and help prescribe specific mobility remedies
based on your issues. I call this the MWOD Fight Club Drill. The idea
is to make an agreement—whether it is with your coach, training
partner, kid, significant other, etc.—to always be in a good position.
You can’t run, and you can’t hide.




                                 180
CATEGORY 1
MOVEMENTS




   Air Squat




     181
Box Squat




  182
Back Squat




   183
Front Squat




   184
Overhead Squat




     185
Deadlift




  186
Pushup




 187
Ring-Pushup




   188
Bench Press




   189
Floor Press




   190
Dip




191
Ring Dip




  192
Strict-Press




    193
Handstand Pushup




      194
Pull-Up




 195
Chin-Up




  196
                        AIR SQUAT
    Squatting and walking. If there are two movements you shouldn’t
take for granted, it’s how to squat and how to walk. Make a good
decision. Master both movements.
    Think about how many times you sit down and stand up. How much
you walk. Walk and squat with crappy mechanics every day for years
on end and it shouldn’t be much of a stunner that your knees and back
glow with chronic pain and a doctor starts describing the modern
wonders of a joint replacement.
    Don’t even get me started on how walking and squatting poorly will
gut athletic potential.
    How a person walks will tell you a lot. The squat, however, is the
looking glass. A full-range, butt-to-ankles air squat is an omnipotent
diagnostic tool for identifying problems and fixing the broken athlete.
    In this section I will break down the squat in detail, and describe how
poor squatting mechanics and missing ranges of motion can lead to
back, hip, knee, and ankle pain. I will also detail how poor squatting
mechanics can transfer over to repetitive, more dynamic movements
such as running and jumping. The bottom line is that if you want to
optimize performance and escape pain and injury, it’s imperative that
you learn how to squat correctly.
    There are many types of squats: air squat, box squat, back squat,
front squat, overhead squat. We’ll take a look at each. First let’s talk
about the critical principles at work with all types of squatting.


Principles of Squatting:
Squat Stance


                                   197
    If you are trying to break 1,200 pounds for the squat, a wide stance is
the ticket. It will allow you to keep your torso upright and squat the
equivalent of a Volkswagen. But if you’re using the squat as an exercise
to improve health and athletic performance, you need a stance that
expresses a full range-of-motion, reveals problems, and transfers to
other athletic movements.
    For most people, positioning their feet just outside the shoulders will
accomplish that goal. This all-purpose squat stance has universality in
sports—think of the ready position of the linebacker, a tennis player, or a
fighter’s combat stance. From this same position you can tackle more
advanced exercises—the front squat, overhead squat, and Olympic lifts
—without having to adjust your feet. Remember the Miyamoto Musashi
quote that I referenced in the introduction to this book: “Make your fight
stance your everyday stance; make your everyday stance your fight
stance.”
    Make your squat stance your everyday stance and make your
everyday stance your squat stance.
    Here’s the deal: Establish a squat stance that best fits your goals as
an athlete and allows you to practice good form. Personally, I mostly use
an all-purpose stance, but on occasion experiment with a wide stance to
throttle the stimulus.




                                   198
Keep Shins Vertical
    This tip is worth the price of this book 100 times over. At least.
    Keep your shins as vertical as possible when you descend and rise
out of the squat. Vertical shins will allow you to channel the power of
your hips and hamstrings and consequently unload weight from the
knees. If you fail to keep your shins vertical and your knees lurch
forward out over your feet, you’ll lose power from the posterior chain
and increase the shear and twisting forces to the soft tissues within the
joint, especially to the cartilage, the patellar tendon, and the ACL. Not
good. Keep shins vertical and experience more power.




                                   199
Load Your Hips and Hamstrings
     Keeping your shins vertical is one thing. You also must initiate the
squat by loading your hips and hamstrings. You do this by tilting your
torso forward and driving your hamstrings back. This will load the right
muscle groups. It will allow you to hinge at the hips with a flat back and
maintain proper torque through your arms and legs. It will fortify your
posture so you don’t break at the lumbar spine.
     For example, a lot of athletes will mistakenly keep their chest up and
reach their butt back as a way to keep their shins vertical, which causes
an overextension fault (aka anterior pelvic tilt). To avoid this, think about
sitting your hamstrings back as you initiate the movement. If you think
about reaching your butt back instead, you’re more likely to default into
an overextended position.




                                    200
Distribute Weight in the Center of the Foot
    To create and maintain maximum torque, imagine screwing your
feet into the ground with your weight distributed over the center of your
feet. Not the balls of your feet, not the heels, the center of your feet, with

                                     201
your mass right in front of your ankles.
     People learning how to squat will often mistakenly roll up on the balls
of their feet. This stems from either a lack of technique or missing
range-of-motion in the quads. Or both. Many coaches like to try and cure
the problem by having a beginner shift his weight to his heels. The
problem with this fix is that it opens the door to other weight-distribution
faults as the athlete develops in the future. Centering your weight on your
heels will make it difficult to create the torque necessary for full stability.
This habit will likely transfer to other movements as well. Imagine trying
to make a big Olympic lift or dunk a basketball with your weight on your
heels. It’s not going to happen.
     Center your weight in front of your ankles and keep your entire foot in
contact with the ground.




Create a Stable Shoulder
    The position of your arms will vary depending on the squat you’re
doing. Regardless, always set your shoulders in a stable position by
creating force from external rotation.
    If you’re setting up for an air squat, pull your shoulders back while
turning your thumbs toward the inside of your body.
    If you’re setting up for a barbell lift, screw your hands into the bar—
your right hand clockwise and your left counterclockwise—as if you

                                     202
were trying to snap the bar in half. This resulting tension will stabilize
your shoulders and turn on the muscles across your upper back,
resulting in a braced-neutral spine. This all-powerful ready position
becomes more critical the more weight you’re dealing with.




                                    203
Air Squat Sequence




                204
1. To set up for the squat, establish your squat stance with your
   feet straight, somewhere between 5 and 12 degrees. Once
   accomplished, go through the bracing sequence: Squeeze
   your butt, pull your ribcage down, and get your belly tight.
   With your spine braced in a neutral position, screw your feet
   into the ground as if you were trying to spread the floor. Next,
   set your shoulders in a stable position and tighten your upper
   back by raising your arms, pulling your shoulders back, and
   externally rotating your hands slightly. Look forward to
   maintain a neutral head position and keep your weight

                           205
           centered over the front of your ankles.
        2. Reach your hamstrings back—keeping your shins as vertical
           as possible—drive your knees out laterally, and start
           lowering into the bottom position. To help maintain tension
           and maximize torque, think about pulling yourself into the
           bottom position instead of dropping into the bottom position.
        3. As your hip crease drops below knee depth, continue to drive
           your knees out laterally, keeping your shins as vertical as
           possible. As you reach full depth, you should feel very stable.
           In other words, there should be no slack in the system. Your
           back should be tight, your knees at the limits of their external
           rotation range, and your hips at peak tension. Note: You may
           need to adjust your knees slightly forward to reach full depth.
           The key is to maintain as much external rotation force as
           possible by pushing your knees out.
        4. Still making a conscious effort to drive your knees out and
           screw your feet into the ground, pull your shins back to
           vertical and extend your hips and knees. Rise out of the
           bottom position in the same way you entered: with your spine
           neutral, knees out, and shoulders and upper back tight. Put
           simply, it’s the same as descending but in the reverse order.
        5. As you stand up, reclaim a stable top position by squeezing
           your butt. This will set your pelvis in a neutral position and
           prepare you for the next movement or repetition.


Knee Forward Fault
   You squat and your knees move forward out over your feet. Wham!
What happened? It’s usually a technique problem—motor-control—and
you may be fighting against brutally tight muscles in the thighs and hips.

                                   206
Motor-Control Fix:
         Isolate the first 6-inches of the squat.
         Focus on creating external rotation torque by screwing your
         feet into the ground and pressing your knees out.
         Initiate the squat by sitting your hamstrings back (load your
         hips and hamstrings), keeping your shins as vertical as
         possible while continuing to shove your knees out.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Posterior High Chain (Glutes)
         Anterior Chain (Hip and Quads)




                                  207
Overextension Spinal Fault
    Failure to organize your spine in a neutral position with the muscles
of your belly tight is like pulling the plug on a cyborg. You will collapse
into an overextended position as you initiate the squat. The moment you
lose control of your pelvis, stability through the chain is lost. Screwing
your feet into the ground and driving your knees outward won’t matter.

                                    208
Power will bleed from the system. This fault is also characterized by a
gross reversal of the pelvis in the bottom position (see butt wink fault,
see here).
     Most people have enough mobility to initiate the first 6-inches of the
squat so correcting this fault becomes a learning related task. However,
if your anterior hip structures are brutally tight (anterior hip capsule, hip
flexor, quads), you are more likely to default into an overextended
position to feed slack to your hip system.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Isolate the first 6-inches of the squat.
          Create external rotation torque by screwing your feet into the
          ground and shoving your knees out.
          Initiate the squat by sitting your hamstrings back. Keep your
          shins as vertical as possible while maintaining external
          rotation torque.

Mobilization Target Areas:
          Anterior Chain (Hip and Quads)
          Posterior High Chain (Glutes)
          Posterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)
          Trunk




                                    209
Valgus Knee Fault
    Before you begin a squat, you want to tighten your core and squeeze
the muscles of your butt. This creates external rotation force at the hip.
Torque. Failure to create this stability will cause your knees to cave in.
This is called valgus knee collapse. Remember, if you fail to create

                                   210
torque at the start of a squat, your body will have to create stability
somewhere else, which is expressed through this fault.
    Turning out your feet past the 12 to 15 degree range increases your
vulnerability to this problem. Wide angled feet can also make it difficult
to produce torque that will stabilize your knees.
    The motor-control fix is simple: Screw your feet into the ground in
the top position and focus on driving your knees out as you lower into the
bottom position. Past the 6-inch point, however, mobility weaknesses in
the ankle, hips, and quads will play a part.
    In some cases, spotting torque faults in the air squat can be difficult,
especially if someone has full hip and leg range-of-motion. That’s why
we always challenge these movements with weight, speed, and high-
repetitions. Challenge the movements and the faults will become
apparent.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Isolate the first 6-inches of the squat.
          Create external rotation torque by screwing your feet into the
          ground and shoving your knees out.
          Initiate the squat by sitting your hamstrings back. Keep your
          shins as vertical as possible while maintaining external
          rotation torque.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
          Anterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)
          Posterior High Chain (Glutes)
          Calf and Heel Cord


                                     211
Shoulder Fault
   If you don’t organize your shoulders into a stable, externally rotated
position, your upper back becomes soft and rounds and you can’t

                                   212
maintain a stable spine. This is usually a setup error, caused by people
forgetting to set their shoulders before launching into the movement.
Poor mobility in the shoulders can also lead to this fault.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Wind up your shoulders into a stable, externally rotated
          position.

Mobilization Target Areas:
          Thoracic Spine
          Anterior Shoulders and Chest
          Posterior Shoulders and Lat




Open Foot Fault
    If you glance at the photos, you’ll notice that I set my feet up at
optimal angles, but as I sink into the squat, my feet spin apart. This fault
dumps torque and bleeds force all over the place. Stability throughout the
system dribbles away.

                                    213
    Lack of mobility is usually the culprit—either missing range-of-
motion in the ankle or hip, or the thigh muscles are just wound up like a
top.
    This fault can also happen when you put your weight on your heels
instead of smack in the center of your feet. Screw your feet into the floor.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Distribute weight evenly between your heel and the ball of your
          foot.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Ankle and Plantar Surface
          Calf and Heel Cord
          Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
          Medial Chain (Adductors)
          Posterior High Chain (Glutes)




                                    214
Range-of-Motion Squat Tests: Ruling

                 215
Out the Ankle
    When you can’t get into an ideal position because you’re missing
key ranges of motion, you have to ask yourself: Where is the
problem? Is it my ankle, quad, anterior hip? Chances are it’s a
system of systems, meaning that it’s a combination of tight tissues.
This is why we take a systems approach to dealing with these
problems by using simple tests to rule out specific areas of the body.
    For example, the ankle wall and pistol test are two ways to see
whether or not you have full ankle range-of-motion or if you are
missing critical corners. What’s great about these tests is you don’t
have to memorize the anatomy or joint measurement of a full range-
of-motion. All you have to determine is whether you can you get into a
pistol position. Yes or no?

Ankle Wall
   The pistol test and ankle wall both tell you if you have full ankle
range-of-motion, but more specifically, the ankle wall lets you know
where you are coming up short. For example, say you lower into the
squat with your feet together, keeping your back flat as you descend. If
you’re missing ankle range-of-motion you will literally hit a wall, at
which point you will either lose your balance, causing you to fall
backward, or you will compensate into a rounded position. In either
case, the moment you hit the wall, that is the limit of your ankle range-
of-motion.




                                  216
Pistol Test
    There is nothing that we do as human beings that requires more
ankle range-of-motion than being in the bottom of the single-leg squat
position (pistol). If you can lower into the squat with your back flat and
extend one of your legs out in front of your body while keeping your
grounded foot neutral, you have full dorsiflexion range-of-motion in
your ankle.




Lumbar Reversal Fault: The Butt Wink
                                   217
Lumbar Reversal Fault: The Butt Wink
     The butt wink fault occurs when your pelvis tucks underneath your
body near the bottom position of the squat. If you start a squat by
reaching back with your butt and unlocking your abs—overextending the
lumbar spine—your femur runs into the top of your hip joint and literally
drives your pelvis back like a slow-motion truck accident. The butt wink
is the pelvis realigning to a better position. However, the overall system
then becomes horribly unstable and poorly braced. This is not a happy
place to be, especially with a loaded barbell on your shoulders.
     If this is your problem, here’s the plan: You need to create and
maintain midline stability and torque. If you have tissue restrictions that
compromise your movement, reduce the depth of your squat and
address your posterior chain and hamstring mobility. Remember, you
never want to compromise safe form for depth.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Squeeze your butt and stabilize your spine in the top position.
         Initiate the squat by driving your hamstrings back, not your
         butt.
         Shove your knees out as far as possible and screw your feet
         into the ground as you lower into the squat.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
         Posterior High Chain (Glutes)
         Posterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)
         Calf and Heel Cord
         Trunk


                                   218
Knee Forward Fault: Bottom Position
    It’s important to mention that a slight forward translation of your
knees will happen as you reach full depth. The key is to make a
conscious effort to drive your knees out and keep your shins as vertical
as possible as long as possible, to avoid loss of position and power.
    Ideally, an athlete will fight to maintain a vertical shin for as long as
possible and will use additional knee flexion—the knee moving forward
—to adjust for increased depth of the squat or to maximize the plumb
line uprightness of the torso. As the knee moves forward, the
stabilization demands at the hip become untenable and the knee

                                     219
experiences significant shear forces.
    When you hear, “Don’t squat below 90-degrees, it’s bad for your
knees,” it means that most people can’t help but move their knees
forward once they drop below the parallel mark. The knees moving
forward is a nightmare position. It’s exposing the soft tissues of your
knees to garden scissors. And it doesn’t end there; because the system
is now so horribly screwed, the knees tend to remain forward on the
ascent out of the squat. Now you’re just movement fault road kill and the
shearing forces continue their shredding ways.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Load your hips and hamstrings as you initiate the squat. Keep
         your shins vertical as long as possible.
         If your knees translate forward in the bottom position, pull your
         knees back, making your shins as vertical as possible, as you
         rise to the top position. Go up the same way you went down.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
         Medial Chain (Adductors)
         Posterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)
         Posterior High Chain (Glutes)




                                  220
Head Fault
    Anybody who has played high school football can relate to this cue:
“Head up, chest up!” It’s another classic cue that coaches use to correct
or prevent an athlete from rounding forward into flexion. (Or correcting a
good morning squat fault—see good morning squat fault—stripper squat
—see here). Although tilting your head back will help keep your torso
upright, it’s exchanging one spinal fault for another: Instead of rounding
forward into a flexed position, you default into a grossly overextended
position. Whether it’s a learned pattern, ingrained from bad cueing, or
you don’t understand the relationship between a neutral head and spine,
the solution is simple: don’t throw your head back.


                                   221
Motor-Control Fix:
         Don’t throw your head back. Maintain a neutral spinal position
         —see bracing chapter (see here).




 Walking And Stepping Mechanics
 Walking Mechanics
     Walking is a complex movement. I could spend a lot of time
 breaking down the joint position and phases of walking, but that is
 beyond the scope of this book. Nor is it necessary. When I address
 walking with my athletes for example, I just tell them to keep their feet
 straight and their spine neutral. It’s that simple.


                                   222
    If you turn out your feet out as you walk, your ankles will collapse
into an unstable position with every step. This is a mechanism for
bunions and a lot of people’s foot and knee-related problems. And just
think of the number of duty cycles you go through. Again, the key is to
get organized before you start moving. Go through the bracing
sequence and focus on keeping your feet straight.

Stepping Mechanics
    Stepping onto an elevated platform or walking up or down the
stairs shares all the same principles as squatting. Think of it as a
single-leg upright squat. You want to keep your torso vertical, spine
neutral, knees out, and feet arched (neutral). The higher the step, the
more you will have to hinge from the hip. Regardless of the height, the
key to success is to keep your shin as vertical as possible.
    When people have problems walking up and down stairs or
stepping onto a box, it’s because their knee is translating forward and
their ankle is collapsing inward. It’s the equivalent of initiating a squat
with zero stability. There’s no torque at the hip, so they overextend
and the downstream structures shift into a wrenched position. The

                                   223
solution is simple: Keep your foot straight, drive your knee out, and
maintain a well-organized, stable trunk.




                                  224
                      BOX SQUAT
   The box squat is a movement that average people perform
thousands of times a week. Every time you sit down and get up from a
chair, toilet, or couch, you perform a close iteration of this squat.


                                 225
    Although the air squat is the first movement that I teach to novice
athletes—it’s my way of layering fundamental squat principles—most
people don’t have the mobility to squat to full depth (even though it’s
something that every human being should be able to do). If squatting butt
to heels is not a viable option, positioning a box at knee-level or slightly
higher is a great way to layer good squat mechanics.
    Unlike the air squat, the box squat allows people to fix problems that
they may or may not be aware of. For example, say you’re struggling to
load your hips and hamstrings and pull your knees back to get your
shins vertical. Having a stable target like a box or a chair to reach for is
an easy way to reverse knee forward faults and ingrain functional
movement patterns. In addition, you can focus on spinal mechanics and
weight distribution in the bottom position without worrying about falling
over. It’s a simple way to scale or adjust the depth of the squat without
compromising form.




                                    226
1. Assume your squat stance. Note: position your heels a few
   inches from the box with a corner angled between your legs.
   Once accomplished, screw your feet into the ground to create
   torque, squeeze your butt, stabilize your midline, and set your
   shoulders in a stable position.
2. Keeping your shins vertical and back flat, sit your hamstrings
   back and hinge forward at the hips.
3. Lower your butt to the box, maintaining tension in your hips
   and hamstrings and back as you sit your butt down.
4. Drive out of the bottom position the moment your butt touches
   down.


                           227
        5. Reestablish the top position.


Standing Out of the Bottom Position
    When you execute the box squat as an exercise, you never
completely release tension in your hips and hamstrings. The moment
your butt touches down, reverse the sequence by standing back up.
However, if you’re having trouble in the bottom position, pausing on a
box or chair is an excellent way to work on standing up with good
mechanics. It gives you a new start position, and allows you to focus on
getting your shins vertical, shoving your knees out, and keeping your
back flat as you rise out of the bottom position.
    This is the key: If you start from the seated position, keep your belly
tight and reload your hips and hamstrings by hinging forward at the hips,
just as you would when initiating the squat.




        1. Sitting is just a box squat with a long pause in the bottom

                                   228
           position. Even if you remain seated for an extended period of
           time, your back stays flat, shins vertical, and knees out.
        2. When you stand up, reclaim tension by loading your hips and
           hamstrings by hinging forward at the hips.
        3. Keeping your back flat, shove your knees out and stand up
           just as you would when performing a squat.


Knee Forward Chair Fault
    When your knees come forward as you get out of a chair it’s usually
one of two things: either you are not comfortable creating tension in your
hips and hamstrings as you stand up, or you haven’t created sufficient
torque. As with the air squat, driving your knees forward out of the
bottom position is primarily a motor-control error.
    If I notice that an athlete’s knees come forward every time he squats
out of the bottom position, I’ll have him sit to a box or chair and put my
hand in front of his knee. Every time his knee touches my hand, I have
him sit back to the box and try again. In addition to illuminating the fault,
this simple tactic brings consciousness to the movement, dramatically
reducing the probability of committing this error.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Create torque by screwing your feet into the ground and driving
          your knees out.
          Hinge forward with a flat back, load your hips and hamstrings,
          and get your shins as vertical as possible.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Posterior High Chain (Glutes)

                                    229
         Medial Chain (Adductors)
         Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
         Posterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)




Overextension Fault
    As with the knee forward fault, an overextension spinal error is
almost always a motor-control issue. As you can see from the photos,
my spine flexes in the seated position (same as the butt wink fault) and
then as I stand up, I immediately default into an overextended position.
Once my pelvis dumps forward, my lumbar spine stabilizes the load of
my torso instead of my hips and hamstrings. My shins are vertical so I
saved my knees from the load, but I trashed my spine. Not good. To
rectify this problem, sit down with a braced spine and keep your belly

                                  230
tight while seated. Remember, you need at least 20 percent tension in
your trunk to maintain a neutral posture.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Address the bracing sequence.
          Get organized before sitting down and keep your belly tight
          while in the bottom position (seated).
          Hinge forward at your hips to load your hamstrings and pull
          your shins vertical before standing up.




                       BACK SQUAT
     It’s one thing to be able to air squat and box squat, it’s an entirely
different thing to squat with a weight on your back. Spend a day at the

                                     231
zoo shouldering your three-year-old and you’ll know what I’m talking
about.
    Once you understand the universal laws of squatting and you’ve
practiced the movement with the air and box squat, you need to up the
ante on your positions and add load. With additional weight on your torso
and hips, small errors that may go unnoticed in the air squat and box
squat become obvious, making it another way to diagnose poor
movement patterns. Not only that, adding a barbell to the equation
changes the level of trunk stiffness and torsion force that is applied to the
movement, which translates to more complex actions.
    This is the idea: If you’re air squatting you might be managing 30 to
40 percent torque and tension levels. While this is great for simple
tasks, the stabilization demands don’t transfer to more dynamic
movements. For example, jumping and landing or squatting with a
heavy load requires much higher levels of trunk stiffness and torsion
force. If you never challenge your setup and your movement with larger
loads, generating higher levels of force is difficult.
    The back squat involves a lot of complex steps: Take the barbell out
of the rack, walk back and assume a squat stance, execute the
movement, walk forward, re-rack the weight. It takes skill, practice, and
razor sharp focus to perform each step correctly. To ingrain the correct
movement patterning and reduce errors, it’s important that you go
through the same load-order sequence. The idea is to minimize the
variability of your movement so that you can preserve the quality of your
position with each transitory step. If you take the bar out of the rack
seventeen different ways, you’re going to start your squat seventeen
different ways.
    This is not to say that you shouldn’t change the bar position or
change your squat stance from time to time. Those changes are fine—
just be sure to practice the same step-by-step setup every time you lift.
If you step back with your left foot first, then do that every single time.
That way, when you’re tired, under stress, or in competition, you don’t

                                    232
make fundamental mistakes because you’ve ingrained the same motor
pattern over and over again. It’s instinctual.
    To shorten your learning curve, I broke down the back squat into
three phases: lift out (taking the barbell out of the rack), walking back,
and then squatting. It’s worth mentioning that the lift out and walk back
are universal steps used in lifts that require you to take a barbell out of
the rack—the front squat, overhead squat, strict-press, push-press,
push-jerk, split-jerk.


Phase 1: Lift Out_(The 6-Inch Squat)
      Anytime you take a barbell out of a rack, you have to set your
shoulders and get your belly tight before adding a load to your spine. It’s
a perfect example of the tunnel concept: If you take the bar out of the rack
and your spine is disorganized, or your hips are in a bad position, it’s
impossible to reclaim a good position.
      The first phase, which is essentially a 6-inch vertical squat, sets the
tone for the rest of the lift. Most injuries and missed lifts relate back to
errors made in this phase, so it’s imperative that it’s done right. If you
don’t perform a good lift out, reset the bar and start from scratch.
Additionally, make sure to set the rack to a height that allows for a good
lift out, which is roughly chest level.




                                    233
234
235
Phase 2: Walk Back
     Walking with a significant weight on your back is a tricky endeavor.
This is why the lift out is so important; it sets up the efficacy of the walk
back. If you lift out with a disorganized spine, walking back is only going
to make your bad position worse.
     To prevent this, execute a good lift out and walk back in the same
pattern every time you back squat. For example, after I lift the weight out
of the rack, I always step back with my left foot, step back with my right
foot, and then establish my squat stance. The steps are short and
deliberate. Don’t walk ten feet from the rack, look down at your feet as
you establish your stance, or do anything that will compromise trunk and
upper back stiffness.




                                    236
Phase 3: Squat
 After you’ve taken the weight out of the rack, walked back, and

                                237
established your squat stance, you’re ready to perform the third piece of
the movement sequence, which is the squat. Aside from managing a
heavier load and organizing your arms in a different position, the back
squat is performed in the same manner as the air squat.




                                   238
Jesse Burdick’s “Back Squat” Shelf
Test
    There are clearly many possible positions for the bar on your
back, but all will be ultimately categorized as low bar or high bar. The
low bar back squat (performed in a more athletic stance, not a wide
powerlifter stance) allows you to tilt your torso forward and load
tension in your posterior chain (hamstrings and hips). The high bar
back squat requires a more upright torso and shifts more demand
onto your quadriceps. The former is typical of most powerlifters

                                  239
(although the only way to support 1000-plus pounds on your back is
with an upright torso), while the latter is common with Olympic lifters.
While it’s good to learn and practice both variations, you’re probably
going to gravitate toward one rather than the other, which is fine as
long as you can perform both.
    The best back squatters in the world will adopt a more “low-ish”
position for the bar during their squatting. The key is to find a
comfortable and tight position for the barbell on your upper back. To
find the sweet spot, perform this simple test:




                                  240
Position a PVC pipe or barbell on your back with your hands spaced
far enough apart so that you can get your wrists vertical and your
elbows underneath the bar. Then, slide the bar up and down the meat
of your upper back (thoracic spine) and shoulders (deltoids, scapula)
to find the tightest position. For some that might be a high bar position
while for others a low bar position. (For most people, that’s just above
the scapula and on the deltoids.) You don’t want it too high on your
neck above your traps (cervical spine) or below the meat of your
external rotators (back of your shoulders). Remember, you should
have enough range-of-motion to place the bar anywhere. But, when it
comes time to have a squat-off dance fight, adopt the best and most
effective position for you.




High Bar Back Squat
  If you’re just learning how to back squat, sticking with either the low

                                  241
bar or high bar variation is what I recommend. However, for the
intermediate generalist athlete, there’s no reason not to learn how to
back squat with the bar in different positions. In fact, if you fall into that
category, you should switch your stance, change the positioning of the
bar, and change the thickness and weight of the bar often.
     Remember: Strength-and-conditioning is a tool for learning and
layering complex movement patterns in a controlled environment. With
the bar higher on your back, you have to position your torso in a slightly
different manner, providing a completely different squat stimulus. Put
simply, this gives you a brand new motor pattern to solve. Unlike the
low bar back squat, which allows you to load your hips and hamstrings
and drop your torso slightly forward, the high bar back squat forces your
torso upright, loads more weight onto your quads, and increases range-
of-motion demands on your hip and ankles. You’re abiding by the same
principles, but now you’re forced to adapt to a new position—see Mark
Bell’s Underloading Method.




                                     242
Mark Bell’s Underloading Method
    Underloading is a concept that Mark Bell—elite American
powerlifter and super coach—uses to train athletes by introducing
new positions.
    Here’s an example: say you’re trying to get stronger with the
deadlift. Rather than add weight, increase the speed of the lift, or
manipulate the set and rep scheme, he will challenge range-of-motion
or position. He does this by making you pull from a deficit, changing
the bar position, changing your grip, or changing the bar type.
    Without adding any additional load, he increases the difficulty of
the movement. This is a clever way to help the lifter progress without
having to make the weight heavier. It’s also a great way to teach

                                 243
 people how to apply the rules of movement and the load-order
 sequence for a movement in a new position. It builds an athlete who
 can adapt to new positions and quickly understand when they’re in a
 bad position, and what they need to do to adjust.



Grip Fault (Broken at the Wrist)
    If you’re missing internal rotation in your shoulders or missing
extension in your thoracic spine, you lose the ability to pull your
shoulders back and brace your spine in a neutral position. As you can
see from the photos, this is characterized by rounding forward into a
flexed position and breaking at the wrists. If you’re not supporting the
weight with your shoulders and wrists in a good position, your elbows
end up taking the full blunt of the load. Experiencing murderous elbow
pain when back squatting? This might be the problem.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Find the shelf of your upper back—see Jesse Burdick’s Shelf
         Test, see here—and make sure your wrists are straight and
         your elbows are positioned underneath or just behind the bar.
         Press your head back into the bar to create a neutral upper
         back.
         If you’re missing range-of-motion, adjust your grip by sliding
         your hands out until you can get your wrists in line with your
         arm.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Thoracic Spine


                                   244
          Anterior Shoulders and Chest
          Posterior Shoulders and Lats
          Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)




Grip Fault (Elbows High)
    Lifting your elbows and pressing the bar into your upper back is
another common grip fault that is characterized by poor shoulder and
thoracic mobility. As with the previous grip fault, failing to create a stable
barbell platform forces you into a forward flexed position, places strain
on your elbows, and opens the door to other movement errors down the
line. Note: this fault is not limited to athletes with poor mobility. A lot of
people mistakenly elevate their elbows in an attempt to create tension in

                                    245
their upper back. This is simply a motor-control error that needs to be
addressed in the setup.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Find the shelf of your upper back—see Jesse Burdick’s Shelf
         Test here—and make sure your wrists are straight and your
         elbows are positioned underneath or just behind the bar.
         Press your head back into the bar to create a neutral upper
         back.
         If you’re missing range-of-motion, adjust your grip by sliding
         your hands out until you can get your wrists inline with your
         arm.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Thoracic Spine
         Anterior Shoulders and Chest
         Posterior Shoulders and Lats
         Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)




                                  246
Head Fault (Checking Stance)
    Looking down to check the orientation of your feet is something that
coaches tell beginners to do while warming up. And with good reason: If
the positioning of your feet is different—one foot is turned out more than
the other—it wreaks havoc with your ability to generate power and
creates an uneven force across your spine. What happens? The body

                                   247
simply shuts down. While this is not a big deal in the early stages of
development when the weight is light, it ingrains a bad habit that will
inevitably cause breaks in spinal position. This is why it’s so important
to have defined motor patterns—meaning you step back the same way
into the same stance every single time—so that you don’t have to
sacrifice neck position to look down.

Motor-Control Fix:
         When you’re first learning how to squat and walk back, try not
         to exaggerate looking down.
         Walk back using the same sequence every single time and
         practice with a light load until you feel comfortable.




                                   248
Good Morning Squat Fault (Stripper
Fault)
    We also call this the stripper fault. It’s characterized by shooting
your hips up and extending your legs out of the bottom position. It occurs
when there is not enough external rotation torque and you don’t feel
stable in the bottom position, so you raise your hips and hamstrings as a
way to support the load.
    Without torque, keeping your back and hip connected throughout the
movement is impossible. As a result, you hinge at the lumbar spine as if
it were a hip joint and use the strength of your back to complete the
movement.
    Again, if you have good motor-control patterning and the strength to
handle the load, your position won’t change: You’ll go up the same way
you went down. If you start to compensate, stop and have your spotter
assist the movement or bail out from underneath the bar. (Note:
Dumping weight off a failed lift is a complex task that you should learn
before handling large loads.) This is easier to see with the deadlift
because if you fail there’s no change in spinal position. You don’t worm
around, collapse forward, or look up; you just stop or drop the weight.
That’s it.

Motor-Control Fix:

         This is very common with athletes who squat with their feet
         turned out, so make sure your feet are straight to allow for
         maximum torsion force.
         Create and maintain torque through range. Think about
         screwing your feet into the ground, shoving your knees out, and
         pulling yourself into the bottom position.



                                   249
                   FRONT SQUAT
      Imagine picking up a keg of beer and lowering it back down to the
ground. Can you do that without ripping apart your knees or back? If you
know how to front squat, yes, you can.
      Lifting a keg of beer, a couch, a bag of charcoal, your kid: Most
lifting-related tasks that we perform on a daily basis require picking
something up or lowering something to the ground with the load
supported in the front of the body. What’s more, the majority of these
tasks require the torso to remain upright. The front squat is a great

                                  250
example of a gym movement that transfers to the tasks of daily life.
    The front squat will ferret out shortages in shoulder, hip, quad, and
ankle range-of-motion—weaknesses an athlete may be able to hide
during the air or back squat. In an air or back squat, the athlete can tilt
his chest forward and reach his hips farther back, giving the hips,
hamstrings, and ankles some breathing room. The upright-torso
demands of the front squat will reveal these mobility limitations and,
once addressed, present opportunities for snagging more performance.
    The front squat is a progression to category 3 movements,
specifically the clean and jerk—pulling a weight from the ground to
shoulder level in one movement and then pressing the weight overhead.


Front Rack Position
    Whether you receive the bar in the clean or take it out of a rack, the
priority is the same: Organize your shoulders into a stable position by
creating external rotation torque with your arms. Failure to do this
results in a rounded upper back. Upper back tension and external
rotation torque are what you’re after. Grip is the place to start.
    The conventional method for establishing an ideal grip is to measure
a thumb’s distance from your hipbone. As you can see from the photos,
raising your arms from this spot can cause your shoulders to internally
rotate and the elbows to flare out, leaving you unsecured. A better bet is
to align your wrists with your elbows to build a supportive platform.




                                    251
In most cases, when you use the conventional front rack setup method to
find your grip, it forces you into a compensated position. As you can see,
my grip is too narrow, making it impossible to get my elbows inline with
my wrists, which is necessary to support the load and create external
rotation torque.

    This is how you do it. Turn your palm toward the front of your body,
curl your hand to your shoulder, raise your elbow to a 90-degree angle,
and then flip your palm toward the sky. (Sometimes it’s helpful to have a
Superfriend give you an assist by directly manipulating you into this
position). You may require a dash of fine-tuning, but this technique will
start to get you dialed in on grip width.




                                   252
If you flex your arm with your palm forward (externally rotated position),
your elbow will deviate out to the side, putting the wrist inline with the
elbow. This also sets your shoulders in a stable position, allowing you to
maximize torque. As with your squat stance, you may have to tinker
around to find the most comfortable and stable position. In most cases,
these adjustments are made based on arm length and shoulder mobility.
Note: For a more detailed description of the lift out and walk back, refer
to the similar phases in the back squat section (see here).


Phase 1: Lift Out




                                   253
254
Phase 2: Walk Back




                 255
Phase 3: Front Squat




                 256
Narrow Grip Fault (Elbows Out)
     If your wrists are positioned to the inside of your shoulders in the
front rack, it’s a blinding giveaway that your shoulders are about as
stable as uranium 235. As you can see from the photos, Diane’s elbows
flare out to the side, unloading tons of force on her wrists. That’s when it
all crumbles. The shoulders internally rotate and she can no longer

                                    257
create tension in her upper back. If this is what’s happening to you, don’t
be shell-shocked when you have to bail on lifts because your wrists feel
like they’ve been chopped at with a dull axe.
    Moral of the story: You can’t manage a heavy load or maintain an
upright torso unless your wrists are inline with your elbows.
    The motor-control fix for this issue is simple: Slide your hands out
and address the stable shoulder front rack setup. If the problem can’t be
solved with motor-control, it’s possible that you’re missing thoracic
extension (upper back flat), internal rotation of your shoulders, and
flexion and external rotation of your shoulder.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Address front rack mechanics and grip position—see stable
          shoulder front rack setup (see here).

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Thoracic Spine
          Anterior Shoulders and Chest
          Posterior Shoulders and Lats
          Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)




                                    258
Cross Arm Fault
    The cross arm front rack position is a classic bodybuilder setup to
the front squat. With your arms crossed in front of your body, you can
create a platform for the bar without challenging shoulder range-of-
motion. This makes for an easier front rack position. Although this
variation still gives you a front squat stimulus, it compromises your

                                  259
shoulder positioning and doesn’t transfer to more dynamic lifts.
Bodybuilders typically don’t perform Olympic lifting variations, so the
fact that it’s not a transferable exercise might not matter. However, not
being able to create torque off the bar will always present problems.
Your shoulders will internally rotate and your upper back will round
forward, making it difficult to achieve a neutral position under heavy
loads.




                                   260
Chest Forward Fault
    When your elbows drop and your chest translates forward in the
squat, it’s an indication that a) you failed to create torque in your hips and
shoulders, creating an untenable front rack position, or b) you are
missing range-of-motion in one or all the following areas: shoulder
(flexion and external rotation), elbow (flexion), wrist (extension),
thoracic spine (extension), hip (external rotation), and ankle
(dorsiflexion).

Motor-Control Fix:
          Address front rack mechanics and grip position—see stable
          shoulder front rack setup (see here).
          Create and maintain external rotation torque in your shoulders
          and hips.

Mobilization Target Areas:
  Front Rack
          Thoracic Spine
          Anterior Shoulders and Chest
          Posterior Shoulders and Lat
          Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)

  Squat
          Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
          Posterior High Chain (Hamstrings)
          Calf and Heel Cord


                                    261
         Medial Chain (Adductors)




“Elbows Up!”
    Telling athletes to get their elbows up during a front squat or clean
is not going to fix the position. It might prevent a missed lift, but it will
not prevent faults. The only way to correct the problem is to
systematically address the issue: Are they creating enough torque to
maintain an upright torso? Can they achieve a good front rack
position? Can they squat to full depth with their torso upright? If an
athlete misses the lift, meaning he drops the weight, it’s probably a
combination of a bad rack and missing range-of-motion in his hips
and ankles. However, if he has a good rack position, he can come

                                    262
 forward a little bit without dropping his weight because he can keep
 his elbows high and maintain a rigid upper back position.


               OVERHEAD SQUAT
     When it comes to making the invisible visible, the overhead squat
will smoke out the truth. It’s the most challenging of the squat iterations.
In the front squat you hold the barbell in front of your body. In the
overhead squat, you stabilize the bar over your head. Nothing will test
your ability to create a stable trunk, generate torque, or reveal your
range-of-motion like the overhead squat. In the same fashion that the
front squat reveals weaknesses that can be hidden within a back squat,
the overhead squat trumps the front squat as a diagnostic tool. Various
disguises of motor-control faults or mobility restrictions will be
scorched away when you open up the furnace door of the overhead
squat.
     Let’s light this up with an example: Say you’re missing a bit of
external rotation in the hips and dorsiflexion in the ankles. Doing a front
squat, you compensate by tilting your torso slightly forward. Your front
rack is good, your spine is rigid, and despite the missing ranges you can
execute the front squat. But take this show down the road to the overhead
squat and things unravel. Tilt the torso offline in the bottom position of the
overhead squat and the shoulders destabilize and unlock, causing the
barbell load to sway precariously above like an anvil in a Wile E. Coyote
trap.
     If you can overhead squat with exceptional technique, it shows that
you not only understand the fundamental principles of bracing and
torque, but you also have full range-of-motion in your shoulders, hips,
and ankles.
     This is why the overhead squat with a PVC pipe is such a popular

                                    263
assessment tool. Within two seconds, a good coach can see spot motor-
control problems and mobility restrictions.
    As with all movements, the key is to become competent with the
movement under light loads (like a PVC pipe or empty barbell), and then
increase the weight or work output to test your ability to maintain good
form under increased demand.
    Note: Although the overhead squat retains all the same preliminary
phases of the back squat and front squat—lifting out of the rack and
walking the load back—before you begin the lift you need to power the
load up into the overhead position. To do this you can either push-press
or push-jerk the weight. The push-press (dip and drive) is fine for lifting
light weight. But for more taxing loads or for workouts with multiple
reps, the push-jerk is the preferred method because it costs you less
energy.




                                   264
265
Shoulder Shrug Fault
    A lot of people will mistakenly shrug their shoulders to their ears in
an attempt to create a stable position. Shrugging your shoulders is
another one of the pointless cues that coaches have been telling their
athletes to do for years. The only way to stabilize your shoulders in a
good position is to create external rotation torque, which is cued with
armpits forward. It’s that simple. Telling someone to press their

                                    266
shoulders up to their ears will cause them to internally rotate into an
unstable position.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Create torque off the bar, keeping your wrists in a neutral
          position, and externally rotate your armpits forward.
          Make sure the bar is aligned directly over your center of mass.




                                    267
268
Unstable Shoulder Fault (Bent Elbow)
    If you can’t lock your arms out overhead, it’s an indication that you a)
don’t understand how to create a stable shoulder position or b) you are
missing internal rotation in the shoulder. Bending your elbows internally
rotates your arms, which unloads tension in your shoulders, lats, and
upper back. While this compensation allows you to get overhead, it puts
your shoulders in an unstable position, creating a toxic motor pattern that
will leak poison into pulling movements like the pull-up, press, and
deadlift. Power is lost by the metric ton and this fault opens the door to
elbow injury and pain.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Create torque off the bar, keeping your wrist in a neutral
          position, externally rotate your armpits forward, and lockout
          your elbows.

Mobilization Target Areas:
          Thoracic Spine
          Posterior Shoulders and Lats
          Anterior Shoulders and Chest
          First Rib Mobilization




                                    269
Grip Fault
   Wrist pain is a common complaint associated with the overhead
squat. This is due to a faulty grip. As you can see from the photo, when
your hands are bent back, your fingers have to support the load, placing

                                  270
severe stress on your wrists. In most cases, athletes will default into
this grip position if they are missing shoulder range-of-motion. Unable to
pull their shoulders into an ideal position as they press overhead, they
will throw their wrists back to balance the bar over the center of their
body. In addition to inviting wrist pain, this broken wrist grip makes it
difficult to create torque off the bar, compromising power and stability.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Position the bar in the center of your palms and keep your
         wrists in a neutral position (straight).
         Make sure the bar is centered over your hips and shoulders.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Thoracic Spine
         Posterior Shoulders and Lats
         Anterior Shoulders and Chest
         First Rib Mobilization




                                   271
Chest Forward Fault
   If your chest drifts forward—whether you’re missing range-of-
motion or you failed to set your shoulders in a good position—your
shoulders will unlock so that you can maintain balance overhead. This is
an untenable position.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Create torque early and maintain that force through range.

                                  272
         Stabilize your shoulders in a good position by locking out your
         arms, creating torque off the bar, and getting your armpits
         forward.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Anterior Chain (Hips and Quads)
         Posterior High Chain (Glutes)
         Medial Chain (Adductors)
         Posterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)
         Calf and Heel Cord




                                  273
DEADLIFT
   274
     Bend over to pick up a toolbox and you’re deadlifting. The deadlift is
both common and crucial to the world of work: A fireman hoisting
someone onto a stretcher, a soldier in the field bending over to grab an
ammo box, or a construction worker picking up an electric saw.
     Each time you bend over to pick something up off the ground, you’re
essentially executing a deadlift. Yet few people understand how to do it
correctly. The fact that so many people round their back when they bend
over to pick something up may explain why millions suffer from lower
back pain.
     People who understand how to deadlift with good form—meaning
they know how to brace, create torque, and never sacrifice form for
range-of-motion—typically have fewer back problems. They have a
model for picking something up that is universally applicable: If you
know how to set up for a deadlift, you know how to pick something heavy
off the ground without compromising your back.
     To protect your back and maximize force production, you need to
bring consciousness to this fundamental movement pattern so that you
can reproduce a good position in all situations. You need to optimize and
ingrain the deadlift setup so you have the same movement outcome
every single time. Whether you’re tired, or stressed out, or both, you
have a blueprint that will allow you to produce maximum power with
minimum risk.
     The deadlift shares the same load-order sequence and universal
laws as the squat: Brace, create torque, load your hips and hamstrings,
keep your shins vertical, and distribute your weight in the center of your
feet. (For an overview of these principles, review the air squat on see
here.) This makes the deadlift a very easy movement to learn and
significantly shortens your learning curve. And as with all category 1
movements, the deadlift serves as a diagnostic tool for assessing range-
of-motion restrictions and motor-control errors. (You can really see
spinal errors and posterior chain restriction with this movement). But
before you start down that path, you need to learn how to optimize the

                                   275
setup.


 Deadlift Range-of-Motion Test




                  276
    To get a read on your mobility in regard to good deadlifting
technique, it’s important to assess your posterior chain range-of-
motion—specifically in your hips, hamstrings, and back.
    One of the best ways to do this is to hinge forward at your hips
with your back flat and legs straight. If you can touch the barbell

                                  277
without rounding your back or internally rotating your shoulders
(essentially a straight leg deadlift setup with your body forked at a 90-
degree angle), you have full range-of-motion and are good to go. If you
come up short, you may need to use the top-down setup option 2 (see
here).
    Here’s another way to assess posterior range-of-motion: To start,
sit on the ground with your legs out in front of you. With your belly
tight, you should be able to sit tall with your back and legs straight. If
you bend your knees, round your back, or break from the upright-
seated position, it’s a dead giveaway that your posterior chain range-
of-motion is wanting or there’s a motor-control issue.




                                   278
    This is not to be confused with the classic sit and reach test,
where in gym class you sat with your feet flush against a box,
clenched your teeth, and reached your hands as far past your toes as
possible. Once you acknowledge the laws of bracing, this test
becomes comical because it reveals exactly nothing about functional
range-of-motion or motor-control. It does, however, tell you how good
you are at rounding the back into a horrible, broken position.

                                279
     Compared to the long sit position test, the straight leg deadlift is
 the preferred measuring tool. You don’t do a lot of movements from a
 seated position unless you’re a kayaker or rower. So adding a weight-
 bearing element—the torso—makes it more realistic.



Top-Down Deadlift Setup
      The top-down setup is the easiest and most effective model for lifting
something off the ground. By organizing your spine in the top position,
you minimize load on your spine and optimize trunk stability prior to
forming your grip on the bar, dumbbells, stone, or other heavy object.
Again, it’s the same bracing sequence as the air squat. One of the
mistakes that people make is to bend over, establish their grip, and then
try to organize their spine and put their hips in a good position. If you set
up for the deadlift by rounding forward, you have to recapture a flat back
from the bottom position, which is difficult. This is no different than trying
to brace your spine in the bottom of the squat. While you can get your
back flat, you will most likely end up in a compromised position because
you can’t create tension in the upper back or stabilize the spine.
      To correctly execute the deadlift, you have to take all the slack out of
the system by creating as much tension in your body as possible prior to
lifting the weight off the ground. You need to actively seek tension. If you
lose tension in the setup, specifically in the hips and hamstrings, you
have to adjust with your knees to reload the area. Bottom line: The more
tension you can create, the more force you can apply to the movement.
      Let’s use a simple example to help illustrate this principle. Imagine a
car that is stuck in a ditch. To pull it out, you hitch a rope from the
ditched car to another car. If there is slack in the rope and the tow car
hits the gas, it’s either going to rip off a bumper or break the rope. To
prevent that from happening, the car in front must eliminate the slack
and create tension on the rope, then pull. It’s the same thing with the

                                    280
deadlift: Create tension by loading the hips and hamstrings and pulling
on the barbell (see caption 7). You almost want the bar to float before
initiating the lift. If you have a 135-pounds on the bar, you should be
thinking about putting a 130-pounds of tension into the bar. If you’re lifting
400-pounds, you need to preload at least 200-pounds into the system to
avoid breaking the metaphorical rope or tearing apart the metaphorical
bumper—as in your lower back.


Top-Down Setup




                                     281
Reload Hips and Hamstrings:
                 282
283
Lift




Hook Grip
    The hook grip is a technique commonly taught to Olympic lifters.
As you can see from the photos, instead of clasping your thumb over
your fingers, which is a conventional grip, you wrap your thumb
around the bar, and then wrap your fingers around your thumb. This
lock prevents the bar from rolling out of your hand and puts your wrist

                                 284
 in a good position for creating external rotation torque. The reason I
 like teaching this for the deadlift is because it allows you to handle
 larger loads and it transfers to other lifts like the clean and snatch.




Option 2: Knees Forward Setup
    Some people can’t quite reach the barbell while keeping their hips
loaded and shins vertical using the top-down setup. This is due to tight
hamstrings and hips. If that’s a problem, use this variation. It’s carried
out in the same fashion as the previous setup, in that you stabilize your
trunk in the top position and hinge forward from your hips while keeping
your shins vertical. But the moment you run out of range in your
posterior chain—meaning you can’t hinge forward or push your hips
back any farther without compromising your spinal position—bring your
knees forward. This will allow you to adjust for position while still
keeping your back flat and your hips and hamstrings loaded. After you
establish your grip on the bar, pull your shins back to vertical to reclaim
tension. It’s the same model: Brace, load your hips and hamstrings, and
use your knees to adjust for position.
    In some cases, people’s ankles (missing dorsiflexion/knee forward

                                    285
range), hamstrings, and hips are so tight they can’t set up from the
ground without rounding their back position, even when using this setup.
In such a situation, scale the setup by setting the bar to a higher position,
using blocks, bumper weights, or a rack.




        1. Establish your squat stance and stabilize your trunk—see
           caption 1 in the previous technique.
        2. Hinge forward from your hips and drive your hamstrings
           back.
        3. The moment you run out of hamstring and hip range-of-
           motion, bring your knees forward and establish your deadlift
           grip. The key is to keep your heels in contact with the ground
           and your spine rigid.
        4. Reload your hips and hamstrings by pulling your knees and
           hamstrings back. Try to get your shins as vertical as
           possible.
        5. Pull the weight off the ground by extending your hips and
           knees. Again, there should be no change in spinal position.

                                    286
      6. Keeping the barbell as close to your body as possible, stand
         up with the bar, squeezing your glutes as you extend your
         hips in the top position.


Mix Grip
    As I mentioned, I generally prefer the double overhand grip
because it allows you to maximize external rotation force and builds
grip strength. It also transfers to other pull-based exercises (pull-up,
clean, snatch, etc.). The mix grip—or what is commonly referred to
as the flip grip—doesn’t allow for ideal shoulder positioning. As you
can see from the photos, my left palm is facing forward and my right
palm is facing back. The problem here is I’ll never be able to create
the same amount of external rotation torque with my left hand as my
right, leaving my left arm vulnerable to injury.
    Not only that, it is a dead end grip, meaning that it only applies to
the deadlift and doesn’t transfer to other movements.
    For some people, the mix grip is a more comfortable position and
allows them to lift more weight, so it does have a place in your
arsenal of techniques. But does that mean it should be used all the
time? Not exactly. Here’s what I generally recommend: Use the
overhand hook grip until your grip starts to fail, which for most people
is around 90 percent of a one rep max. Then, implement the flip grip.




                                   287
288
Bottom-Up Setup Fault
    A lot of people will set up for the deadlift by rounding forward,
establishing their grip on the bar, and then trying to set their spine and
hips in a good position. Don’t get me wrong, I’ve seen people pick up
enormous loads setting up in this manner, but they almost always round
forward into a compromised position. Here’s why: When you hinge
forward from your hips without stabilizing your spine, you rely on the
anterior musculature of your pelvis to pull your back into a flat position,
shortening the front of your hips. You can pull your back into a neutral
position, but you can’t lock in or stabilize the position. If you’re deadlifting
heavy, you will usually round forward. If the weight is light you might be
able to maintain a flat back, but because your hips are in a shortened
state, standing up into a neutral position is difficult. You will usually
overextend to get your torso upright. To put it another way, the bottom-up
setup loads your back instead of your hips and hamstrings. So if your
lower back hurts after you deadlift, there’s a strong chance you’re
committing this fault.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Address the top-down setup (both options).




                                     289
Tension-Hunting Fault
   Setting up from the bottom position predisposes people to a rounded
back. However, this fault is not limited to the setup. Even if you set up
from the top position, if you fail to take all the slack out of the system,
you will always default into a bad position. This is what I call tension-
hunting. If your hips, hamstrings, and back are not tight, your body will
take up the slack, which is expressed with a rounded back. The key to
avoiding this fault is to maximize tension in your body by pulling on the
bar. Remember, the deadlift is a slow movement. In other words, you
never go from 0 to 60; rather, you go from 40 to 60.
   Note: Failure to preload the bar will express itself with a definitive

                                    290
click, which is the barbell hitting the bumper weight. Again, the weight
should feel like it’s floating before you actually lift it from the ground.

Motor-Control Fix:
          After setting your grip, be sure to pull your knees back and
          raise your hips to load your posterior chain before initiating the
          pull.
          Create sufficient external rotation torque in your shoulders by
          screwing your hands into the bar.




 Powerlifters Rounding Their Back
                                     291
     A lot of powerlifters will pull with a rounded upper back—while
keeping the lower back flat—because it shortens the distance they
have to pull the weight to the lockout position of the hips. This is where
people get confused. The upper back is in fixed flexion, meaning that
they round forward and then create tension and torque in that position.
     What people have to remember is that rounding the upper back is
a conscious decision that professional powerlifters make. And they
understand the consequences. A classic case is Donny Thompson, a
professional powerlifter and world record holder. He was practicing
deficit deadlifts with a rounded back and suffered a disc injury. His
reaction was: “I knew better. I was pulling with a rounded back and it
got me.” At no point will a professional powerlifter ever round their
lower back when performing a deadlift. It would be like a bomb going
off. However, to get a slight edge, sometimes they will sacrifice the
safety of their position if it means being able to lift more weight.
     With that said, a beginner or fitness lifter should never round their
upper back as a means of lifting more weight. Why? Because it
increases susceptibility to injury, ingrains a dysfunctional movement
pattern into your daily life, and does not translate to other athletic
movements like dynamic pulling and jumping.
     I like Jesse Burdick’s general rule for pulling heavy with a rounded
upper back. When you can deadlift 600-pounds, then you can start to
entertain thoughts of rounding your thoracic spine. In fact, many of the
best Olympic lifting coaches in the world, like Mike Burgener and
Glenn Pendlay, won’t let their athletes pull heavy deadlift singles for
the reason that they don’t want to ingrain a pulling pattern with an
upper body (upper back and shoulder position) that won’t translate to
Olympic style weightlifting.



Tension Fault
                                   292
    A properly executed deadlift is expressed with a single movement,
meaning that everything goes up at the same time (hips and knees
extend simultaneously). If an athlete starts to lift the weight off the floor
and his hips come up first and then the torso follows, it’s an indication
that he didn’t take up all the slack in the system. They are tension-
hunting. Although he can still maintain a flat back, which is great, he
compromises his ability to generate maximum force.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Before lifting the weight off the ground, raise your butt and bring
          your knees back. This will load tension into your posterior
          chain. With your hip and hamstrings fully engaged, lower your
          hips and shove your knees out, pulling on the bar as you lower
          into position.




                             PUSHUP

                                     293
    Imagine if you will: An adrenaline freak is bombing down a trail of
jagged rock on a full-suspension mountain bike. Or a climber is scaling
a vertical shelf of blue ice at 18,000 feet. Or a powerlifter is bench
pressing a record load surrounded by screaming powerlifting maniacs.
Or a 335-pound NFL offensive is tackling with a 4.8 40 speed, pulling,
ripping, pushing, and dismantling a blitzing linebacker.
    Have one or all of those images in mind. Now what do you think will
happen if that athlete doesn’t understand how to organize his shoulders
into a good position? This is what happens: His shoulders internally
rotate and his elbows flare out, sacrificing his ability to create force and
opening the door to injury.
    Most upper body movements conducive to sport and life are
performed at midrange and out in front of your body: feeding, grabbing,
carrying, pushing, and pulling. To operate effectively within this domain,
you need a model that teaches you how to create a stable shoulder
position.
    Enter the pushup.
    As with the air squat, the pushup is where you can start to layer the
principles of bracing and torque. The pushup also serves as a diagnostic
tool for assessing motor-control and range-of-motion. But instead of
illuminating what’s happening at the hips, the pushup tells you what’s
going on at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist. You go through the same
checklist: Does an athlete understand how to brace his spine in a neutral
position? Or create external rotational torque by screwing his hands into
the ground (set the shoulder in a good position)? Does he have the
range-of-motion and motor-control to keep his hands straight and
elbows close to his body as he performs the movement? Without having
to use any equipment, you can see how well an athlete understands the
fundamental principles of bracing and torque, as well as identify
restrictions in his mobility.
    In addition, the pushup serves as a launch pad to more complex
pressing motions—the bench press, dip, and overhead press—and

                                    294
more complex motor patterns as well. If you understand these basic
concepts and can apply them to the pushup, you are less likely to default
into bad positions when you’re training with more complicated
movements.
     No wonder so many athletes suffer from torn rotator cuffs and
dislocated shoulder injuries, and why people experience anterior
shoulder pain every time they press. They don’t understand the
principles that govern good positions as it relates to the shoulder, elbow,
and wrist. The pushup teaches and ingrains those fundamental
movement patterns and gives coaches and athletes a template for
solving problems at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist.
     Coaches, athletes, and physical therapists will often relate shoulder
issues to a weak rotator cuff or weak shoulders. Although this is a
contributing factor, it’s not necessarily the root cause. It’s about position:
If you don’t have a model for creating a stable position, generating
spontaneous torque and force is difficult. Once you understand how to
correctly perform a pushup, it doesn’t matter where your hands are,
what you are grabbing, pushing, or pulling. Nor does the orientation of
your arms matter. You can still create a stable and mechanically
powerful position.
     Note: The pushup shares a lot of the same principles as the squat
and deadlift, but instead of loading your hips and hamstrings, keeping
your shins vertical, and distributing your weight over the center of your
feet, you load your pecs and triceps, keep your forearms vertical, and
distribute your weight over the center of your hands (in front of your
wrist). The concept of stance is also transferable. As with your squat
and deadlift stance, you should find a comfortable position that transfers
to other pressing motions. Positioning your hands shoulder-width apart
is a good start. The goal is to establish a position that allows you to
perform the movement with good technique. Once you’re proficient, start
switching up the width of your hands from time to time to create a new
stimulus.

                                     295
Setup




To correctly set up for the pushup, kneel down and situate your hands at
about shoulder-width with your fingers pointing straight ahead. Once
accomplished, sprawl your legs back, position your feet together, and
squeeze your glutes. Note: Positioning your legs together maximizes
glute activation and tension in your trunk. In the photo, you’ll notice that I
start with my hands out in front of my body. By keeping your weight
slightly back, you take load off of your shoulders, making it easier to
screw your hands into the floor and create an external rotation torsion
force.




                                     296
Top Position




Still actively screwing your hands into the floor, lever forward,
positioning your shoulders over your hands. To help maximize torque,
think about getting the pits of your elbows forward.


Midrange Phase




                                 297
Keeping your weight centered over the center of your hands (just in front
of your wrists) and your forearm vertical (elbow inline with your wrists),
start lowering into the bottom position. This is the equivalent of keeping
your shins vertical in the squat in that it maximizes force production and
protects your elbows. Remember, you load your triceps and pecs for the
same reason you load your hamstrings and glutes in the squat. The pecs
help stabilize your shoulder in a good position so that your triceps can do
their job, which is to extend the elbow.


Bottom Position




                                   298
Lower into the bottom position. Keep your butt squeezed, belly tight, and
forearms as vertical as possible.


Midrange Phase




As you press out of the bottom position, there should be no change in
your spinal or shoulder position. Your back should be flat and your
shoulders retracted (pulled back).

                                   299
Top Position




Still screwing your hands into the ground, extend your arms and
reestablish the top position.


Elbows Out Fault
    The majority of people can set up for the pushup in a good position,
meaning that they can create torque and get their back flat. But just like
the squat, the moment they start lowering into the bottom position, errors
become easy to spot. For example, a lot of athletes will flare their
elbows out and compensate with a shoulder forward position as they
lower their chest to the ground. When I see this happen—whether it’s in
the first few inches or in the bottom position—the first thing that comes
to mind is missing internal or external rotation at the shoulder. While a
poor setup and weak triceps can contribute to this fault, it’s almost

                                   300
always a shoulder range-of-motion issue.
   As you can see from the photos, once my elbows fly out to the side,
my shoulders get loaded into a bad position. This is why people
experience wrist, elbow, and anterior shoulder pain. Whether they are
bench pressing a heavy load, stabilizing a weight overhead like with the
overhead squat, or performing body-weight movements like pushups or
dips, they have no choice but to adopt an elbow-out, shoulder-forward
position to execute the movement. It’s no surprise that people feel hot,
burning pain in the front of their shoulders when they press. They are
missing 100 percent or their internal rotation range-of-motion.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Address the setup in the top position: squeeze your butt, screw
         your hands into the ground (elbow pits forward), and keep your
         forearms vertical as you descend and rise out of the bottom
         position.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Anterior Shoulders and Lats
         Posterior Shoulders and Chest
         Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)




                                  301
Open Hand Fault




                  302
    As I explained in the torque chapter and in the squat techniques, if an
athlete is missing ankle or hip range-of-motion, he will generally turn his
feet out to increase his range-of-motion. The same thing happens in the

                                   303
pushup. If an athlete is missing rotation at his shoulder (internal or
external rotation) or flexion at his wrist, he will usually compensate into
an open-hand forward shoulder position. As with the open foot, this
causes a landslide of mechanical problems up and down the chain, and
is what opens the door for a lot of the injuries and pain people experience
when they press.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Focus on the position of the pushup. Position your hands
         straight—between 12- and 1-o’clock (right) and 12- and 11-
         o’clock (left).
         Screw your hands into the ground, creating an external rotation
         torsion force, and try to get the pits of your elbows forward.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Anterior Shoulders and Lats
         Posterior Shoulders and Chest
         Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)




                                   304
Elbow Back Fault
    If you’ve read the introduction to the air squat, you already know that
driving your knees forward early in range typically stems from not
creating sufficient external rotation torque: You failed to screw your feet
into the ground and shove your knees out so your knees track forward to
compensate. The pushup exists in a parallel universe. Failure to screw
your hands into the ground results in loading your elbows. What
happens? Your back positions breaks, power leaks away, and your
elbows hurt.
    As a quick recap, loading your chest and triceps is the equivalent of
loading your glutes and hamstrings in the squat. Your chest helps keep
your shoulders in a good isometric position (just as your glutes keep
your hips in a good isometric position). Your triceps are responsible for
extending your elbows (just as your hamstrings extend your knees and
hips). To accomplish this, screw your hands into the ground and keep
your elbows inline with your wrists.

Motor-Control Fix:

                                   305
Pull your shoulders back and create and maintain torque by
screwing your hands into the ground, positioning your elbow
pits forward.
Think about keeping your forearms as vertical as possible as
you initiate the movement.




                        306
307
Scaling the Pushup




    If you are not strong enough to correctly perform a full-range
pushup, you can do one of two things: Place your hands on a higher
surface (chair, box, or wall) or make the movement easier using
Mark Bell’s slingshot. Note: If you don’t have access to a slingshot
(you should), you can loop a Rogue monster band around your
elbows. Both methods lower the demand, making the movement
easier, while still allowing you to idealize a neutral spinal position.
What’s particularly great about the slingshot, however, is it prevents
your elbows from flaring out to the side and supports your weight in
the bottom position. So in addition to removing some of the load, it
encourages good mechanics. This is the equivalent of doing a pull-up
with a Rogue monster band hooked around your feet. You can mimic
the movement without compromising form.
    Important: A lot of coaches and athletes will mistakenly scale the
pushup by dropping their knees to the ground. While this reduces the
load and makes the pushup easier, it compromises your ability to
squeeze your butt and create tension in your trunk. Doing a pushup

                                 308
 from your knees encourages bad mechanics. In order to create a rigid
 flat back, you need to set your pelvis in a neutral position by keeping
 your butt squeezed: If you perform a pushup from your knees,
 accomplishing this task is impossible.




                     RING-PUSHUP
    Adding rings to an exercise is like injecting the movement with truth
serum.
    People can perform the pushup in a low torque environment and get
away with it. Forget it when it comes to the rings. The moment an
athlete climbs on the rings, he has no choice but to generate torque. He
has to screw his hands into the rings and keep his elbows over his
wrists. This is why athletes sometimes experience pain in the front of
their shoulders when performing pushups and the bench press, but don’t
when doing ring-pushups. The instability of the rings makes it difficult to
move with bad mechanics. The athlete needs to provide the stability.
    Also, the physics introduced by the rings will show you the light in

                                   309
terms of positioning your hands and the path of your arms—positions
and paths that should be applied to the pushup and bench press.
    The ring-pushup provides at least two benefits: It challenges an
athlete with increased stabilization demands, while also ingraining
proper pressing mechanics. Here’s why: When athletes perform
pushups on the rings, their hands automatically orientate underneath
their shoulders. They turn their hands out to create an external rotation
force and their forearms remain vertical, allowing their elbows to stay
tight to their body.
    In other words, people will instinctively create a more stable trunk
and adopt an externally rotated shoulder position because it’s the easiest
way to stay balanced over the rings. If your hands rotate inward
(internally rotate), or your elbows deviate back or drift out to the side,
your arms will start to shake erratically, making it impossible to
stabilize the position.
    Note: Don’t feel like you have to reserve the ring-pushup for
advanced athletes. A lot of novice athletes can benefit by just learning
how to stabilize in the top position.




                                   310
Position the rings so that they hang at roughly shoulder-width. Next,
kneel on the ground, form your grip, and then walk your legs back. If you
glance at the photo, you’ll notice that Carl’s feet are together and he’s
balancing on the front of his toes (not on the balls of his feet).
Remember, the ring-pushup requires more trunk control than the
classic pushup. By balancing on the front of your toes, you maximize
glute activation, which in turn helps create and maintain a stable trunk.
To create a stable shoulder, externally rotate your hands so that your
thumbs are pointing away from your body. Your left hand should be at
about 11 o’clock and your right hand at about 1 o’clock.




                                  311
Keeping your butt squeezed, your belly tight, and your hands turned out,
lower into the bottom position. Note the position of your arms: Your
wrists should be in line with your elbows (forearms vertical) and elbows
should be in tight to your body. Even if you’re missing shoulder range-of-
motion, the rings force your arms into an ideal position. However, it’s
important to note that if you’re missing internal rotation of the shoulder,
your hands will start to rotate inward. Fight this force and try to reclaim
a thumb-out position as you rise out of the bottom.




                                   312
Still turning your hands out and keeping your back flat, press out of the
bottom and reestablish the top position.


                    BENCH PRESS
     Here’s a problem with the bench press: Coaches and athletes
generally put more stock in how much people lift than how well the
movement is performed. It begins with the 300-pound bench press club
at the high school gym and the status associated with earning a club T-
shirt. The question, “How much do ya bench?” is the defacto joke within
the free weight gym culture. While you should know the answer, the
question you should be obsessed with if you’re sincerely hell-bent on
pursuing hot, nasty, high-level athletic performance is this: How good is
your bench press form?
     Very few athletes understand the variables involved in a proper
bench press. It just seems so simple: You lie down on the comfy bench,

                                   313
take the barbell out of the rack, guide it down to your chest, and then
extend your elbows. What’s the big deal? But like the squat or the
deadlift, there are a lot of variables that you have to account for. Setting
your shoulders in a good position, bracing while lying on your back, and
keeping an ideal bar path takes a lot of practice and technical ability.
     A good bench press comes down to using good movement practices.
For instance, you should know how to set your shoulders in a stable
position and create torque off the bar. You should know how to brace in a
globally arched position. You need your wrists in line with your elbows.
If one of these steps isn’t carried out correctly or you are missing key
ranges of motion, you will see horrific movement errors: elbows fly out,
shoulders roll forward, the head bobbles into crazy positions, and the
back overextends. It’s a five-car collision. Because people can press
insanely large loads without paying any attention to technique, the bench
press is probably responsible for more shoulder injuries than any other
movement in the history of the world.
     If we can teach people how to bench with good form, we can save
millions of shoulders. The bench press doesn’t just teach you how to
press through midrange, it also gives you a blueprint for creating torque
with your shoulders retracted to the back of your socket. The pattern
translates to other pulling exercises like the clean and the deadlift. The
bench press is also a diagnostic tool: People can disguise their
movement and mobility dysfunction in low torque environments like the
pushup but can’t hide them once the torque demands are increased with
load.
     Note: As with the squat and standing press iterations, taking the bar
out of the rack is a skill in and of itself. To ensure a successful and safe
lift out, there several things that need to happen: arch your back, retract
your shoulders, create torque off the bar, screw your feet into the ground,
take a breath, and get your belly tight. Performing these tasks correctly
is predicated on a good bench press setup. If something goes wrong in
the lift out phase, completing the movement with good form is difficult.

                                    314
To improve your understanding, I’ve broken the setup into categories.


Grip
    The best way to figure out your grip distance is to establish the top
position on the rings with your hands turned out. For most people, this is
just outside shoulder-width, which is much narrower than people
typically prefer. The fact is you need a grip that will allow you to keep
your shoulders blades pulled back, generate sufficient torque off the bar,
keep your elbows in a 30-45 degree plane from your body, and maintain
a vertical forearm. You also want to keep the bar positioned in the center
of your palm, aligned with your wrist. While this may seem intuitive,
people will adopt some really crazy grips like centering the bar across
the fingers. Not only is this dangerous—imagine a barbell rolling off your
hands onto your neck or face—it will also cause a lot of wrist and thumb
pain.




                                   315
Stance
    Just as poorly organized shoulders compromises the efficiency of
the squat, poorly organized hips will affect your ability to bench press.
To maintain a rigid trunk, you need a stance that allows you to create
sufficient torque. It should look a lot like your squat stance. All the same
rules apply: Keep your shins vertical and position your feet as straight as
possible, screw your feet into the ground, drive your knees out, and
distribute your weight over the center of your feet. People will adopt
untenable foot positions that make it impossible to create torque or get
into a braced position.




                                    316
Braced Extension
   To correctly perform the movement, you need to create an arch and
keep your shoulders pulled back. However, this does not mean you’re
overextended. The key is to arch back to set your shoulders, brace your
abs, and then lower your hips to the bench. If you drop your ribcage or

                                  317
keep your back flat with the bench, keeping your shoulder blades
retracted is difficult. This is not easy and takes time to master. Having a
tight thoracic spine can also make it difficult to create a good arch.




Height of the Rack
    Although telling you that it’s important to set the rack to the right level
seems ridiculous, I’ll say it anyway: Set the rack to a height that allows
for a slight bend in the arm. For an ideal lift out, you should be able to
extend your arms and press the weight out of the rack while keeping
your shoulder blades pulled back. If the rack is too high, you will have to
protract your shoulders, which is a huge setup error.



Bench Press Sequence


                                     318
1. To set up for the bench press, lie underneath the bar so that it
   bisects your collarbone or neck and assume your bench
   press stance.
2. Before lifting the weight out of the rack, pull your shoulder
   blades back and create torque off the bar. Imagine trying to
   break or bend the bar with your hands. This tightens your
   upper back and sets your shoulders in a stable position. As
   you do this, screw your feet into the ground, drive your knees
   out, squeeze your butt, and elevate your hips. You will

                           319
           maintain these actions through every step.
        3. Lift the weight out of the rack and align the bar over your
           shoulders. Notice that the bar is resting in the center of
           Jesse’s palms directly over his wrists.
        4. Keeping your shoulder blades pulled back, lower the weight to
           your chest. Think about loading your triceps and chest by
           pulling your elbows down and keeping your forearms as
           vertical as possible.
        5. Extend your elbows and reestablish the start position.


Elbows Out Fault
     As with the pushup, a lot of athletes will flare their elbows out to the
side because they are missing internal rotation in their shoulders or they
failed to create and maintain sufficient torque in the setup to the lift. This
also happens when people don’t keep their shoulders screwed into the
back of their socket: If there is slack in your shoulders, your elbows will
fly out to the side to take up the tension. If you’re missing range-of-
motion, you may want to consider implementing the floor press as an
alternative exercise.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Focus on trying to bend the bar with your hands and pull your
          shoulder blades back. Maintain high levels of torque during the
          movement.
          Keep your wrists aligned with your elbows.

Mobilization Target Areas:


          Thoracic Spine
                                     320
         Thoracic Spine
         Anterior Shoulders and Lats
         Posterior Shoulders and Chest
         Downstream Arm (Elbow/Wrist)




Elbows Back Fault
    The setup is without question the most complex aspect of the bench
press. Once your shoulders are set and the bar is aligned over your
shoulders, the bench press is largely a function of just bending and
extending your elbows. The goal is to bend your elbows, keeping them in
a 30-45 degree plane from your body, while maintaining a vertical
forearm. The problem is a lot of people don’t feel comfortable lowering
the bar to their sternum because it requires a higher degree of mobility,
strength, and control. To circumvent their mobility restrictions and lack

                                  321
of triceps strength, they will load their shoulders instead of their triceps
and chest. As you can see from the photos, this puts an incredible
amount of shear force on your wrists and elbows.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Create and maintain torque by consciously trying to bend the
          bar.
          Focus on keeping your wrists in line with your elbows while
          keeping your shoulders back.
          Practice the ideal bar path. You can use the ring-pushup as a
          tool to practice good bench press form.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Thoracic Spine
          Anterior Shoulders and Lats
          Posterior Shoulders and Chest
          Downstream Arm (Elbow/Wrist)




                                     322
                    FLOOR PRESS
    Although the bench press is a fantastic movement, it poses problems
for a lot of people. It expresses a high degree of extension and internal
rotation of the shoulder—elbows tracking behind your body—and
requires triceps strength, something that a lot of people don’t have. For
example, if you are missing internal rotation range-of-motion in your

                                  323
shoulders or you have underdeveloped triceps, the bench press will
exaggerate a lot of faults: your elbows fly out, shoulders roll forward, and
you squirm around underneath the bar in search of stability and power. If
this is you, know that you are ripe for ingraining a toxic movement
pattern. Make a good decision and scale back to the floor press.
    The floor press restricts the bench pressing range-of-motion action,
but provides you with the same stimulus—meaning that you can still
mobilize your shoulders to the back of the socket, load your triceps, and
practice a loaded midrange press without having to work around your
mobility issues.
    To put it in simple terms, the floor press is a valuable tool that
protects athlete’s shoulders while still teaching them how to press
through midrange. This is also a great exercise to throw into a large
group of people without worrying about having to correct a lot of faults.
    Note: All the same rules apply as the bench press. Your grip,
stance, and load-order sequence is exactly the same as the bench
press.




                                    324
The lift out is carried out in the same manner as the bench press. To see
the load-order sequence for this step, refer back to the bench press
technique.




                                  325
Keeping your forearms vertical, shoulders back, and belly tight, lower
your triceps to the floor. The key is to load your chest and triceps by
keeping your forearms vertical.




                                   326
The moment your triceps touch down, immediately press the weight
back to the start position by extending your elbows.


                                DIP
    The path to developing optimal power output from the shoulders is
this: Perform a wide swath of exercises that stabilize the shoulders from
a variety of ranges.
    The pushup and bench press teach you how to stabilize your
shoulders out in front of your body. The strict-press and push-press
teaches you how to stabilize loads overhead. And the dip teaches you

                                  327
how to generate stability while your arms are by your side.
    Even though the dip is technically a pressing element, it forces the
same stabilization demands as carrying heavy objects. The dip
transfers to tasks in daily life like carrying a suitcase or getting up out of
an armchair.
    Although the underlying principles of the dip are the same as
midrange and overhead movements—create external rotation torque,
pulling your shoulder blades back—it’s a new stimulus for the shoulder.
If people don’t spend time working in these extension ranges, they are
more likely to compensate forward into a bad positions when carrying or
performing basic tasks with their arms by their side or behind their
body.
    Plus, being able to perform a full-range quality dip is a prerequisite to
more dynamic movements like the muscle-up: If you can’t stay in
control in the bottom position of the dip, creating spontaneous torque as
you transition into a muscle-up is hopeless.
    The dip is a complex exercise that requires enormous strength,
control, and shoulder range-of-motion. For these reasons, you need to
understand how to scale the movement.
    To scale the dip, start in the top position and make sure you can
stabilize your shoulders in a good position with your arms locked out. If
you don’t have the strength or range-of-motion to lower into the bottom
position, you can use a band or Mark Bell’s slingshot to make the
movement easier. If you have access to parallel bars, you can walk
back and forth with your arms locked out to develop positional strength.
    Just because you have the strength to perform the movement doesn’t
mean you’re doing it right. There is a lot that can go wrong. For
example, people often struggle to keep their forearms vertical and load
their chest and triceps because they are missing shoulder range-of-
motion or don’t follow the proper load-order sequence. Instead they drive
their elbows back, overextend, and keep their chest upright, and then
wiggle around in the bottom position in search of a mechanical

                                    328
advantage. This is where a lot of shoulder damage occurs and why
people experience pain in their sternum when they dip.


Setup
    Don’t be half-assed about setting up for the dip. Pay attention to
detail. First, you need to make sure your dip station is high enough to
straighten your legs. If the apparatus is too short, you will be forced to
bend your knees and cross your ankles behind your body. This results in
an overextension spinal fault (see here).
    The width of your grip is also important. The conventional method is
to use your forearm (elbow to fingertips) to measure your grip distance,
which doesn’t really tell you anything about your start and finish position.
The best way to figure out how far apart you need to position your hands
is to stand straight with your arms by your sides and then rotate your
hands so that your palms are facing away from your body. You want the
bars positioned just to the inside of your pinky fingers. Just as in the
ring-pushup, you can use the rings to determine proper grip width.
    While these are not perfect methods, it will put you in a position
where you can maximize torque and shoulder stability. If it works out to
be the same length as your forearm and fingers, that’s great: You have
an easy model for measuring the proper grip distance.




                                    329
330
      1. The start position for the dip shares a lot of the same cues as
         the pushup and press: You want to screw your hands into the
         bars, try to get the pits of your elbows forward, and externally
         rotate your shoulders into the back of your socket. Ideally, you
         want your feet together, your toes pointed, and your butt
         squeezed to maintain that position and support your pelvis in
         a neutral position. Your feet should be midline or out in front of
         your body.
      2. Keeping your legs straight, feet pointed, butt squeezed, and
         belly tight, lower into the bottom position by allowing your
         chest to drop forward. This loads your pecs and triceps. Like
         the squat, imagine pulling yourself down while screwing your
         hands into the bars. The key is to focus on keeping your
         shoulders back (think about squeezing your shoulder blades
         together as you lever forward), your spine rigid, and your
         forearms vertical.
      3. Still screwing your hands into the bars, extend your elbows
         and reestablish the top position. There should be no change in
         torso position.


Stabilizing Your Shoulder
   In our gym, there is no such thing as a shoulder stabilization
exercise. Every shoulder movement has a stabilization component.
This is where coaches and physical therapists miss the mark.
   Doing accessory exercises like externally rotating your arm back
and forth with a cable machine or light dumbbell is not going to teach
you how to pull, push, press, carry, or lift with a stable shoulder. You
need to incorporate movements that force you to stabilize your
shoulders in a good position. That’s why it’s so important that you

                                  331
 learn how to perform midrange movements like a pushup, overhead
 movements like the strict-press, and by your side or behind your back
 movements like the dip.
     For example, there are still a lot of coaches out there that dismiss
 exercises like the press for swimmers, baseball pitchers, and
 volleyball players—athletes who perform a lot of overhead-type
 movements—because they believe that overhead exercises are
 dangerous. This is a valid point if you don’t understand what a stable
 shoulder position looks and feels like. Say an athlete has already put
 in gazillions of overhead repetitions. If he’s doing it with crappy form,
 the last thing you want him to do is more overhead work with bad
 technique. What to do?
     Answer: Teach him the stable position for the shoulder. Then
 teach him how to strict-press with good technique. This will not only
 improve the overall effectiveness of his overhead position, but also
 allow you to assess his end-range position. He doesn’t have to press
 a lot of weight or perform a ridiculous amount of repetitions. However,
 as a responsible coach, you need to instill fundamental stabilization
 principles and highlight mobility and motor-control dysfunction.



Shrug Fault
    If you are missing shoulder range-of-motion, pulling your shoulders
back into a good position and locking out your elbows is impossible.
While the same is true with the pushup and bench press, it’s easier to
disguise. This is what makes the dip such a great diagnostic tool. With
the full weight of your body supported by your shoulders, you can’t mask
limited shoulder mobility.
    If you start in an organized position, but compensate into a bad
position as you lower into the bottom position, it’s a good indication that
you’re missing extension and internal rotation in your shoulders or lack

                                   332
the strength to correctly perform the movement.
    Your pecs are responsible for stabilizing your shoulders into an
externally rotated position. Because the dip requires a high level of
stability from your shoulders, your pecs have to work extra hard to keep
your shoulders locked into a stable, externally rotated position. If your
shoulders roll forward or shrug, your pecs will pull off axis, which pulls
the sternum apart—the reason why some people experience intense
pain in the sternum when they dip.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Use the pushup as a model to ingrain proper shoulder
         stabilization mechanics before progressing to the dip.
         Isolate the top position: Focus on squeezing your butt with your
         legs straight and together, screwing your hands into the bars,
         getting your elbow pits forward, and pulling your shoulders
         back.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Thoracic Spine
         Anterior Shoulders and Lats
         Posterior Shoulders and Chest
         Downstream Arm (Elbow and Wrist)




                                   333
334
Overextension Spinal Fault
    Bending your knees and crossing your ankles behind your body is a
setup error that can cause overextension fault. The bottom line is you
can’t engage your glutes and stabilize your pelvis in a neutral position
unless your legs are straight and positioned together.
    If you glance at the photos, you’ll notice that as I press out of the
bottom position, I throw my head back and arch into an overextended
position. In this example, I’ve surrendered my spinal position and the
stability of my shoulders so that I can generate upward momentum.
Arching back, elbows deviating outward, and shoulders compensating
forward is my body’s way of finding stability so that I can complete the
movement. Not good!

Motor-Control Fix:

         Keep your legs straight and pinned together, pointing your toes.
         Your feet should be positioned underneath or slightly out in
         front of your body.
         Squeeze your glutes and establish a neutral spinal position.
         Pull your shoulders back and create torque off the bar.




                                   335
Overextension Fault
    Just because your legs are straight and your shoulders are set in a
good position doesn’t ensure a quality dip. If you look at the photos you’ll
notice that my shoulders are pulled back, my feet are together, and my
toes are pointed, but I’ve failed to squeeze my butt and brace my core.
As I initiate the dip, my elbows and feet move back, my chest bulges
forward, and I instantly lose stability in my shoulders.
    Most movements require that you balance your ribcage on top of
your pelvis, but in this situation you have to stabilize your pelvis
underneath your ribcage, which is challenging if you’re just learning the
movement. Although the load-order sequence is the same, people will
often forget to brace their trunk as they initiate the dip, resulting in this

                                     336
fault.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Squeeze your glutes to set your pelvis into a neutral position.
         Keep your glutes engaged and maintain a flat back as you
         initiate the movement.
         Allow your chest to translate forward, focusing on keeping your
         forearms vertical. This will load your triceps and chest, as
         well as keep your shoulders locked into a good position.




                                 337
338
                          RING DIP
     One of the prime functions of the Movement and Mobility System is
to teach and layer movements that transfer learning to other
movements. The ring dip is a star example of this. In addition to
providing a more challenging stimulus, it preps you for more dynamic
movements like the muscle-up.
     As with the ring-pushup, the ring dip requires an additional dose of
problem solving. Mobility issues are forced out of hiding. You can tell
when someone is missing internal rotation in their shoulders because
they struggle to achieve an externally rotated position and can’t lock out
their elbows.
     Ring dips also promote good movement practices and automatically
correct common faults. For example, a common fault with the classic
dip is to pull your elbows back as you lower into the bottom position.
This internally rotates your shoulders, sucking you into a compromised
position. However, in order to stay balanced over the rings and remain
in a stable position, you have to keep your forearms vertical. Put another
way, you physically can’t press with your elbows behind your wrist.




                                   339
340
        1. To stabilize your shoulders, externally rotate your hands so
           that your thumbs are pointing away from your body. Now pull
           your shoulders back. Your left hand should be at about 11
           o’clock and your right hand at about 1 o’clock. Position your
           feet together, point your toes, squeeze your glutes, and then
           tighten your core.
        2. Keeping your butt squeezed, your belly tight, and your hands
           turned out, lower into the bottom position. If you glance at the
           photo, you’ll notice that Carl levers forward, keeping his feet
           out in front of his body. This loads his triceps and chest and
           keeps his shoulders and trunk in a good position. Also note
           the position of his arms: his wrists are in line with his elbows
           (his forearms are vertical) and his elbows are in tight to his
           body. It’s important to mention that as you lower your hands
           you will rotate to about 12 o’clock. If you’re missing internal
           rotation in your shoulders, your hands will continue to rotate
           inward. Fight this force and try to reclaim a thumb-out
           position as you rise out of the bottom.
        3. Still turning your hands out and keeping your back flat, extend
           your elbows and reestablish the top position.


                    STRICT-PRESS
     The strict-press is one of the moves that offer a golden opportunity to
practice the rules of bracing and torque when your arms are overhead.
It’s also a magnifying glass for assessing motor-control trouble spots
and mobility restriction.
     For example, say someone can’t get their shoulders into the proper
position when they press a barbell overhead. What does that tell you
about their motor-control and shoulder range-of-motion? And what do

                                    341
you think will happen when they try to receive a heavy load in the jerk?
Or rattle off any overhead movement while burning with met-con
fatigue?
    If you don’t understand the ideal start and finish position or lack the
range-of-motion to perform the task, you can’t apply these fundamental
concepts to more complex overhead actions.
    Look for this: Can the athlete keep his back flat with ribcage down
and pelvis neutral? Can he get his shoulders into the end-range flexion
with his elbows straight? Can he express a stable shoulder position by
getting his armpits forward? It’s that simple.
    This strict-press is also a very useful rehabilitation tool. For
example, if you’re coaching someone whose coming off a knee injury or
rehabbing after ACL surgery, this is one of the first weight-bearing
exercises that you can introduce. It still requires a low level of external
rotation torque—they have to shove their knees out and screw their feet
into the ground—so it will help strengthen the injured joint and
surrounding musculature, as well as re-groove functional movement
patterns.


Barbell vs. Dumbbell
    People will ask me: “Why do you encourage pressing with the
barbell … isn’t it easier to learn and safer to press with dumbbells?”
    Before I answer, it’s important to note that the closer you can position
the weight to your centerline (general center of mass), the easier it is to
press from that position with good form.
    If you have limited shoulder range-of-motion or your technique is off,
the dumbbell press is a great option because it allows you to keep your
shoulders organized in a correct position without compromising form.
    So if you have shoulder pain when you raise your arms overhead
with a barbell, pressing with dumbbells helps reduce that pain due to
improved setup positioning and more rotational options of the arm when

                                    342
the dumbbell is overhead.
    There’s no arguing the fact that pressing with dumbbells offer distinct
advantages. The same goes for kettlebells. In fact, it’s something that I
encourage all of my athletes to do. However, the dumbbell press will
ultimately limit the max load an athlete can put overhead.
    Additionally, one of the problems that you will perennially see as
athletes move toward more complex lifts like the push-jerk and split-
jerk is they don’t have a model for creating torque off a fixed object
(barbell) and they lack the strength to perform these movements under
load. That’s why it’s so important to get people pressing with a barbell in
their developmental stages—because it ingrains fundamental movement
patterns that translate to these more complex movements, even as it
builds the pressing strength needed to move heavier weight.
    However, the barbell does present certain challenges: You have to
clear your face as you press the weight overhead; you have to support
the load out in front of your body; you have to balance the bar on your
chest while keeping your forearms vertical; and you have to generate
force from a dead-start position. But like all movements shown in this
book, it teaches you a load-order sequence that transfers to other moves
and objects.
    The objective is to teach movements that express stability in your
joints and core through full ranges of motion, as well as allows for a
variety of movements. While the barbell is by no means a natural
implement, it’s the easiest tool for challenging the athlete’s competency
overhead. There comes a point where lifting heavy dumbbells simply
becomes untenable.


Strict-Press Setup
     The setup to the press is very similar to establishing the front rack
position out of the rack (see front squat, see here). You still create torque
off the bar (breaking the bar and twisting your elbows underneath) one

                                    343
arm at a time, lift the weight out of the rack as if it were a front squat, and
walk back. But instead of lifting your elbows to a 90-degree angle and
balancing the bar on your fingertips and shoulders, you position the bar
on your chest and in the center of your palms.




   A couple of nuances worth mentioning are the width of your stance
and grip. Determining your stance is easy; it’s the same as your
jumping stance or deadlift stance. Your feet are straight and positioned
underneath your hips, roughly shoulder-width apart.
   Figuring out your grip is a little trickier. There are a few different
methods you can use. You can implement the front rack setup
demonstrated on see here, get into the top position of the ring-pushup (as


                                     344
shown on see here), or execute the band press test. The keys are this:
shoulders screwed into the back of the socket, forearms vertical, wrists
aligned with your elbows, and the bar resting in the center of your palms.




                                   345
346
Front Rack Fault
    A common mistake is to initiate the press from a front rack position.
While you can get away with this when executing the push-press and
push-jerk, it doesn’t work with the strict-press. With the bar balancing
on your fingertips, you can’t generate enough force from the start
position to lift the weight off your chest. People will do this because they
don’t have a model for pressing with a vertical forearm or they are
missing range-of-motion in their shoulders or their thoracic spine is
brutally tight—or all of those things.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Set up for the press out of the rack. Position the bar in the
          center of your palms and make sure your elbows are aligned
          with your wrists (and the bar).
          Keep your shoulders screwed to the back of the socket by
          generating torque off the bar.


                                    347
         Perform the band press test—see next page.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Thoracic Spine
         Anterior Shoulders and Lats
         Posterior Shoulders and Chest
         Downstream Arm (Elbow/Wrist)




                                348
349
Arch Fault
     The trunk stabilization demands are high in the strict-press. Unlike
the push-press and push-jerk, which harness the power of your legs and
hips, the strict-press requires you to press using the strength of your
shoulders and arms. This dead-start phase is what makes the strict-
press such a tricky movement. As the weight gets heavier, people will
search for a mechanical advantage by arching back and pressing the
weight out in front of their body, like a bench press. While this makes it
easier to get the weight off the chest, it destabilizes the primary engines,
causing the elbows to fly out and the shoulders to roll forward.
     This fault is also common with people that try to move the bar
around their face instead of pulling their head back. In most cases, this
fault can be addressed by simply lowering the weight, keeping the butt
squeezed, and maintaining a vertical bar path by moving the head back.
However, if someone has a tight thoracic spine and is missing rotation
in their shoulder, they might not be able to set their shoulders into a good
position. If that happens, they will always press the weight out in front of
their body as illustrated in the photos.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Squeeze the glutes and keep the belly tight.
          Prioritize the setup out of the rack by screwing your shoulders
          into the back of the socket.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Thoracic Spine
          Anterior Shoulder/Lat
          Posterior Shoulder/Chest


                                    350
Downstream Arm (Elbow/Wrist)




                     351
352
Band Press Test
      The band press test is great for a couple of reasons. For starters,
it illuminates the importance and efficiency of a stable shoulder.
Secondly, it shows people that their lovely push-jerk front rack
position doesn’t translate to the press.
      Here’s how it works: Hook a band around your foot and adopt a
pressing position that is similar to the front rack. Then, try to extend
your arm overhead from that position. What you’ll find is that your
shoulder immediately translates forward into an unstable position and
you struggle to raise your arm overhead. Next, pull your shoulder
back into a good position and press. Right away, you will see that it’s
much easier to lockout your arm. As soon as you bring your shoulder
back and get your elbow tight to your body, it’s much easier. You’re
able to harness all the stability of your shoulders and transmit energy
effectively to the band.
      In a nutshell, the press test is a great way to challenge the
efficiency of your press and sheds light on what an effective press
should feel and look like.




                                  353
Elbows Out Fault
                   354
     If your elbows flare out to the side as you extend your arms overhead
it’s an indication that you’re not generating enough torque or failed to set
your shoulders in a good position during the setup. However, if you’re
unable to lockout your arms overhead, which is very common, chances
are good that you’re missing range-of-motion in your shoulders. This is
a detrimental mechanical pattern that will become a real problem when
the weight gets heavy or you graduate to more complex lifts like push-
pressing and push-jerking.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Generate sufficient torque in the setup and keep your elbows in
          as you press overhead.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Thoracic Spine
          Anterior Shoulders and Lats
          Posterior Shoulders and Chest
          Downstream Arm (Elbow/Wrist)




                                    355
Head Forward Fault
 Another common fault is to push your head through your arms as

                              356
you extend your elbows overhead. Coaches will often cue their athletes
to push their head through because athletes will mistakenly pull their
head back to clear their face and then leave it there as they lockout their
arms overhead, causing a lean back fault. Telling them to push their
head through aims to correct this fault by reminding them to move
underneath the barbell as it passes their face.
    The problem is that a lot of people will overcompensate by pushing
the barbell backwards and driving their head forward. In addition to
unlocking their shoulders and compromising spinal position, this puts an
enormous amount of shear on the cervical segments of the neck. So
when people are pressing and their heads penetrate through their arms
and the barbell moves behind their body, you have a recipe for a quick
neck injury. The correct technique is to bring your head back just enough
to clear your face and then move underneath the bar as you press the
weight overhead, keeping your torso and head in alignment.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Keep your head in line with your torso.
         Think about keeping a vertical bar path and moving your head
         just enough to clear your face.
         Practice with lighter weights until you’re proficient with the
         technique.




                                   357
358
            HANDSTAND PUSHUP
                             (Freestanding)


     The handstand pushup is not a natural movement. I mean, aside
from gymnastics, break-dancing, and CrossFit, rarely do people do
anything inverted.
     However, it is still an excellent movement to infuse into your training
program. In fact, the handstand pushup is one of the best movements for
driving home the relationship between ribcage and pelvis alignment. You
have to balance your pelvis and legs on your ribcage, which exposes a
lot of holes in people’s midline stabilization strategy and shoulder
organizational strategy.
     Unlike most training movements, the handstand pushup requires that
you organize your trunk through your shoulders via your hands, instead
of your hips via your feet. For example, when you set up for a squat you
create torque (stability) in your hips by screwing your feet into the
ground and then balancing your ribcage over your pelvis. But with the
handstand pushup, you do the exact opposite, which is very challenging
for people. You’re basically getting organized in the finish position of a
press. From a motor-learning and trunk-stabilization perspective, the
handstand pushup is unparalleled.
     Again, to improve as an athlete, you have to find different ways to
challenge your motor-control. The more training tools an athlete has in
his movement arsenal, the better and more stable he will be. Should this
belong in the repertoire of all athletes? No. A powerlifter or Olympic
lifter is certainly not going to do handstand pushups. They have plenty of
other skill transfer exercises that teach good shoulder positioning and
trunk stabilization. But for the average person, it’s a fundamental skill
that will improve athleticism and, more importantly, it will tell you a lot
about your ability to organize your shoulders and trunk in an unfamiliar

                                    359
position.




            360
1. To set up for the handstand pushup, go through the bracing
   sequence and hinge forward from your hips as if you were
   executing a single-leg deadlift. Using your free leg as a
   pendulum, place your hands on the ground at your pushup
   distance, and kick up to a handstand by swinging your legs
   over your body. Keep your legs straight and create an
   external rotation force by screwing your hands into the ground
   as you transition into the handstand. The key is to keep your
   legs together and your toes pointed to maximize glute
   activation and stability. Focus on keeping your butt squeezed,
   belly tight, and armpits forward.
2. Still screwing your hands into the ground, break at your
   elbows and let your entire body tilt back, keeping your entire
   body rigid. One of the compromises of doing a handstand
   upside down is you can’t leave your head in a perfect position.
   If you look at the photo, you’ll notice that Carl tilts his head

                           361
           back just enough so that he can see the ground.
        3. Lower your body until your head touches the ground.
        4. As you press out of the bottom position, think about keeping
           your body rigid and your elbows in tight to your body.
        5. As you lockout your arms, get your head through your arms
           and underneath your body to level out. At the same time, try to
           get your armpits forward to maintain external rotation toque.


Handstand Pushup (Supported)
    A freestanding handstand or a freestanding handstand pushup—that’s
the goal. But it takes an extreme amount of strength, stability, and motor-
control to pull off. The stepping-stone to such a skill is to use a support
like a wall. This is the equivalent of squatting or benching on a Smith
machine in that you can move up and down in a straight line. Another
option is to have a Superfriend support your feet. This requires higher
levels of stability and is great for finding your balance while inverted.
    And you don’t even need to perform the actual movement; just get
into the start position and work on locking out your elbows, getting your
armpits forward, and organizing your trunk. It’s a great place to teach
people about shoulder and trunk stability. Like I said, nothing challenges
the ribcage to pelvis relationship like the handstand pushup.




                                   362
363
   1. Positioning your hands roughly 6-inches from the wall, go
      through the bracing sequence and then kick up into a
      handstand. Here are the keys: Keep your hands straight, butt
      squeezed, legs together, toes pointed, pelvis balanced over
      your ribcage, and your armpits forward.
   2. Screwing your hands into the ground, break at the elbows and
      lower your head to the ground. As you descend, try to keep
      your forearms vertical, your elbows in tight to your body, and
      your back and legs aligned.
   3. As you press out of the bottom position and lockout your
      arms, get your armpits forward.


Scorpion Handstand Pushup Fault




                             364
    The faults for the handstand pushup are the same as those for the
standing press: Ribcage tilt, head up, elbows out, and shoulders forward.
And just like the pushup, people will spread their legs, which puts their
butt offline, causing a gross overextension lumbar spinal fault. It’s a
disaster.
    Interestingly, this is what most people look like when they try to walk
on their hands. I see this all the time and I think to myself:
“Congratulations, you’re walking on your hands . . . and you’re wrecking
your motor patterning for all your pressing motions and destroying your

                                   365
back and shoulders.” Seriously, there are so many things wrong with
this picture I don’t know where to begin.
    The fact is, you would never press in this position. If we flipped the
photo of Carl upside down, put a barbell in his hand and told you to
evaluate the position, what would you say? I suspect nothing good.
    Here’s the deal. You have to get organized at the trunk and work on
setting your shoulders into the correct position—armpits forward. Keep
your hands straight so that you can maximize torque, keep your feet
together, and point your toes to maximize glute activation. If you have to
look down to see the ground, try not to exaggerate the movement. Aside
from that, the motor-control solution and mobility prescription is the
same as the strict-press faults.



                           PULL-UP
    If you view athletic movement through the lens of “how much” and
“how fast,” the odds of defaulting into a bad position just skyrocket. The
pull-up offers a sizzling example. In most cases, little or no attention is
paid to how the athlete sacrificed his spine, neck, and shoulder position
as if he were drowning at sea. The quality of a pull-up gets reduced to,
“Was the athlete able to get his chin over the bar? Yes or no?”
    It’s not about whether or not a movement was completed, but rather
whether or not the movement was completed with good form.
    Imagine if I told you that rounding your back when you deadlift heavy
is acceptable as long as you complete the lift. That wouldn’t make
sense, right? It contradicts the underlying theme of this book. Well, it’s
the same thing with the pull-up.
    If you can’t perform the movement correctly without compensating
into a bad position, it’s damaging. You can get away with it for a while,
but eventually hanging with bent elbows and overextending your lumbar

                                    366
spine is going to kick your ass.
     At our gym, we teach our athlete’s the strict pull-up for the same
reason we teach the strict-press. It allows us to effectively teach and
ingrain good mechanics in a low-risk environment. We can then
progress to more dynamic moves like the kipping pull-up with less risk
of defaulting into a poor position. The idea is to develop physical
competency with the movement from a dead-start at end-range before
challenging them with a speed element.
     Once we can get athletes to create and maintain a rigid spine and
stable shoulders, it becomes an issue of strength. If the athlete can’t
initiate the movement with good form, we’ll simply scale the movement
by hooking a band around his feet. In addition to building strength, the
band reduces the torque demands and allows him to move through a full
range-of-motion.


Hook Grip
    Just as the positioning of your feet dictate your ability to generate
torque in your hips and maintain a neutral spine, your grip dictates your
ability to generate torque in your shoulders and keep your ribcage down
when performing a pull-up. For most people, positioning their hands at
roughly shoulder-width apart or adopting the same grip distance as their
pushup or strict-press is a good start.
    The next step is to learn how to grip the bar. If you glance at the
photos, you’ll notice that Carl implements a unique grip. Instead of
adopting a traditional grip of hooking his thumb over the top of the bar, he
wraps his thumb over his index or middle finger. In addition, he also
positions his pinky fingers over the top of the bar, creating a slight bend
in the wrist. This grip is superior because it locks your hand to the bar
and allows you to create torque, which sets your shoulders in a stable
position.
    This modified false grip offers a couple distinct advantages. For

                                    367
starters, it winds his shoulders up into an externally rotated position. In
other words, he doesn’t have to think about breaking the bar because
he’s already torqued. When your wrists are positioned directly
underneath the bar, you have to work a lot harder to create torque in your
shoulders. Secondly, this hook grip dead hang position is also a great
diagnostic tool for assessing overhead range-of-motion: If you can keep
your torso integrated while hanging with the pull-up hook grip, it’s an
indication that you have full range-of-motion overhead.




                                   368
       1. Establish a pull-up hook grip. Next, brace your trunk by
          squeezing your glutes and pulling your ribcage down. Position
          your legs together with your toes pointed. This allows you to
          maximize tension in your glutes and core. If you examine the
          photo, you’ll notice that Carl’s back is flat, his ribcage is
          balanced perfectly over his pelvis, and his shoulders are
          screwed into the back of the socket (armpits forward).
       2. Keeping your belly tight and butt squeezed, pull yourself up.
          To keep your torso and shoulders integrated, imagine pushing
          your feet forward as you initiate the pull. Don’t make the
          mistake of disengaging your core as your torso deviates
          back.
       3. With your pinky still positioned over the bar, pull your chest to
          the bar—keeping your head in a neutral position. Note: If you
          can’t raise your chin over the bar with your head neutral, stop.
          Don’t try to throw your head back to complete the movement.
       4. As you lower yourself down to the start position, nothing
          should change: Your back is still flat, butt squeezed, belly
          tight, pinky over the bar, head neutral, legs together, and feet
          pointed. As long as you maintain a braced-neutral trunk and
          your grip stays intact, you don’t have to think about breaking
          the bar—you will remain in a state of high torque.
       5. Finish the movement the same way you started, in a good
          position.


Upper-Back Flinch Fault
    As mentioned, very few people are strong enough or have the motor-
control to initiate a strict pull-up. To gain a mechanical advantage,
athletes often tilt their ribcage back, unlocking their shoulders, and

                                   369
overextend their lumbar spine. This is also common with people that are
missing internal rotation in their shoulders or are not comfortable with
the hook grip. Rather than create torque, they keep their shoulders soft,
which feeds slack downstream to the torso, making it easier to initiate
the pull.
     If your back, shoulders, and trunk are not on tension entering the
movement, your body will hunt for stability. This is characterized by
tilting your ribcage, your elbows flaring out, your shoulders rolling
forward, and your head cranking back. All the same faults that you see
with the strict-press. Coincidence? I think not. You’re towing the car out
of the ditch with slack in the rope.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Address grip mechanics: make sure your pinky is positioned
         over the bar.
         Squeeze your butt, pull your ribcage over your pelvis, position
         your legs together, and point your toes.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Thoracic Spine
         Posterior Shoulders and Lats
         Anterior Shoulders and Chest
         Downstream Arm (Elbow/Wrist)




                                   370
371
Cross Leg Fault
    Just like the dip, a lot of people mistakenly set up for the pull-up by
hooking their feet behind their body and bending their legs. This prevents
your legs from flying apart, which happens when you’re not strong
enough to perform a strict pull-up, and allows you to pump your knees
up to your chest to generate upward momentum.
    This also happens if you set up on a bar that is too low to the ground.
Regardless of why you do it, this fault makes it impossible to engage
your glutes and set your ribcage over your pelvis, putting you into an
overextended position. If you start from an overextended position, there
is no way that you can create torque and stability in your shoulders. So
in addition to moving with a disorganized spine, your shoulders move up
to your ears and your lats turn off. Put simply, you’re hanging from an
unstable shoulder joint.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Address grip mechanics: make sure your pinky is positioned
         over the bar.
         Straighten out your legs, position your feet together, and point
         your toes. Squeeze your butt and balance your ribcage over
         your pelvis.




                                   372
373
                            CHIN-UP
     The goal is to be able to create torque from any hand position and
express a full range-of-motion with every movement. In fact, performing
pull-ups with your hands in different positions is a nice way to test your
understanding of the movement. However, you don’t want to adopt a
position that undermines your technique. For that reason, I recommend
you start by learning the conventional palm-forward pull-up. It teaches
you how to create torque, puts your shoulders into a stable position, and
makes it easier to maintain a braced-neutral spine. Once you’re
competent with a full range-of-motion overhead, test your position by
implementing the chin-up.
     If you’re unable to lock your arms out and keep your ribcage down
with a chin-up grip, there’s a good chance that you’re missing range-of-
motion overhead.
     Putting your arms in a position of full external rotation provides more
stability because you don’t have to actively hunt for tension. The problem
is that externally rotating your hands makes it difficult to create torque at
end-range. Not only that, if you can’t get into an end-range start position,
your elbows bend and your ribcage tilts, which is less than ideal. So in
addition to pulling from a compensated position, you’re not expressing a
full range-of-motion (no wonder they’re easier).




                                    374
1. The setup for the chin-up is the same as the pull-up: Squeeze
   your butt, position your legs together and out in front of your
   body, point your toes, pull your ribcage down, and keep your
   head neutral. Notice how Carl’s shoulders are in a fully
   externally rotated position. While this sets his shoulders in a
   good position, he will have to work extra hard to keep his
   ribcage down and his spine neutral as he initiates the pull.

                           375
2. Keeping your elbows tight, ribcage down, head neutral, and
   butt squeezed, pull yourself toward the bar. Think about
   keeping your legs out in front of your body as you lever back.
3. Pull your chin over the bar. Keep your head neutral and avoid
   reaching for the bar with your chin.




                           376
CATEGORY 2
MOVEMENTS




    377
Wall Ball




  378
Push-Press




   379
Jumping and Landing




       380
Kettlebell Swing




      381
One-Arm Swing




     382
Rowing




 383
Kipping Pull-Up




     384
Snatch Balance Progression




           385
                        WALL BALL
     As a quick recap, category 2 movements are similar to category 1
movements in that you start and finish in a position that allows you to
cultivate trunk stiffness and torque. But instead of staying connected to
the movement—meaning that you maintain torque and tension through
the movement’s entire range-of-motion—you add a speed element and
momentarily remove the connection.
     The wall ball is one of the first category 2 movements that I introduce
to novice athletes or someone who is coming off an injury. It’s a simple
squat that adds a dynamic stimulus—throwing and receiving a medicine
ball—while challenging an athlete’s ability to maintain a vertical torso.
It’s a great way to assess an athlete’s motor-control patterns and
deficiencies.
     Here’s an example: Say you’re training a novice athlete. He’s now
competent with fundamental movement principles and category 1
movements. You’ve also challenged him under load with an upright
torso. The next step is to introduce category 2 movements such as the
wall ball. What you will find is that the moment he’s asked to
spontaneously create torque off of an object that is not a barbell,
everything falls apart. He starts overextending his lumbar spine,
rounding his upper back, and driving his knees forward. And the only
thing you asked him to do was squat with a medicine ball, throw it to a
target, and receive it in a stable position.
     Now, should the wall ball be part of every elite level athlete’s training
program? Not necessarily.
     This is the idea: By adding a speed element, you expose
weaknesses in the athlete’s profile in an environment where the chances
of getting injured are very low. (You can also add a metabolic demand to
the equation, making it even harder for him to disguise his poor


                                    386
movement patterns and mobility restrictions.) This is extremely useful
for a coach because now you have a simple model for teaching an
athlete how to transmit force from his hips to his shoulders. You can
teach him how to spontaneously create torque in the bottom position of
the squat, as a progression to the Olympic lifts: If he can’t receive an 8-
pound ball in a good position what do you think will happen with a 95-
pound barbell? This is what makes the wall ball such a rich and useful
movement.

    Note: The common faults associated with the wall ball include:
forward inclination of the torso, internal rotation of the shoulders,
overextension of the lower back, valgus knee collapse, etc. Revisit the
air squat and front squat for motor-control and mobility solutions.




                                    387
1. To set up for the wall ball, assume your squat stance with the
   medicine ball positioned at head level, screwing your hands
   into the ball to create a stable shoulder position. Stand far
   enough away from your target so that you can receive the ball
   in the start position. In other words, you don’t want the ball to
   fall in front or behind you, but right at your chest.
2. Keeping your torso upright, lower yourself into the bottom
   position just as you would when performing a front squat—
   see front squat, see here. Keep your head neutral and focus
   on keeping your back flat. Don’t try craning your neck so that
   you can see your target.
3. As you increase your elevation, focus your gaze on your
   target. Again, you don’t need to throw your head back to do
   this. If you set up correctly, you’ll be standing far enough

                            388
          away so that you can see your target without craning your
          neck.
       4. As you stand tall, extend your arms and throw the ball to the
          target. The key is to extend your arms equally. In other
          words, don’t try to throw the ball like you’re shooting a free
          throw. A lot of people will overcompensate with their
          dominant arm, which compromises your ability to receive the
          ball in a good position. Be sure to squeeze your glutes as you
          stand tall and reestablish a strong upright position before
          receiving the ball.
       5. Receive the ball out in front of your body in the exact same
          position you started. The idea is to receive the ball overhead
          and move down with the ball, screwing your hands into the
          ball to set your shoulders in a good position as you descend.


                     PUSH-PRESS
    You set up for the push-press like you would a strict-press. But
instead of pressing the weight off your chest from a dead-start, you bend
and extend your knees to accelerate the weight overhead. The “dip and
drive” addition of power allows you to handle larger loads. It also
teaches you how to transmit force from your hips to your shoulders, a
pattern that transfers to more complex movements, like the clean and
jerk.
    In the push-press you don’t have to generate as much torque in the
start position because you’re using the power of your legs and hips to
press the weight off of your chest. So if you have mobility issues that
make the strict-press rack position untenable, the push-press rack
position will give you some breathing room and still allow you to go
overhead.

                                  389
    Think of the push-press as a weighted vertical jump. In fact, the
push-press is a great way to layer and teach proper upright torso
jumping and landing mechanics: If you understand how to dip and drive
by shoving your knees out and keeping your back flat, you have a model
for jumping and landing with a vertical posture that doesn’t trash your
back or knees.
    To help with your understanding, think of the dip and drive as the
jump, and lowering the weight as the landing. Most people have not been
taught how to jump and land with good form.
    Imagine jumping up for a rebound, spiking a volleyball, or performing
a strength-and-conditioning circuit that calls for high-repetition box
jumps and push-presses, like CrossFit’s Fight Gone Bad workout. What
happens when you don’t have a model for shoving your knees out or
keeping a flat back? You drive your knees forward and overextend. No
wonder so many people suffer from insidious knee pain—commonly
referred to as jumper’s knee (patellar tendonitis)—after engaging in
such activities.
    Note: The most common faults associated with the push-press
include: driving your knees forward, overextending your lumbar spine,
pressing the barbell out in front or behind your body, flaring your elbows
out, and internally rotating your shoulders. To address the knee forward
and overextension faults related to the dip and drive, revisit the air squat
and front squat. To address the pressing faults, flip back to the pushup
and strict-press.




                                    390
391
392
393
          JUMPING AND LANDING
    Jumping straight up and down, or even bounding forward from a
square, stationary stance, is essentially an unloaded dynamic squat. You
hinge forward from your hips, loading your posterior chain, create torque
through your hips by creating external rotation torque, and keep your
shins as vertical as possible. You also see the same faults.
    People will drive their knees forward. If their feet are angled out, you
will see ankles collapse, valgus knee faults, overextension at the lumbar
spine, etc. The only difference with jumping and landing is the
consequences are much higher, especially if you’re coming down from
an elevated platform or combining a ton of jumping and landing
sequences together in a single workout.
    Consider a sport like basketball or volleyball where athletes put in
countless jumping and landing cycles. Now imagine what happens if
they develop a knee forward or open foot or knee in movement pattern.
They’re doomed. The insidious load on their knees is insane and the

                                    394
mechanism for how they get jumper’s knee. (Note: jumper’s knee is
caused by an irritation of the patellar tendon, the tendon that connects the
kneecap to the shinbone, due to forward and valgus translation of the
knee during jumping and squatting movements.) This is also how people
invite ACL tears.
     Mobilizing and smashing the upstream and downstream tissues will
certainly alleviate a lot of the irritation caused by jumper’s knee and help
you get into a better position. But the only way to fix this issue is to
address the technique.
     With jumping and landing from a stationary stance, it’s easy: Adhere
to the movement principles and focus on keeping your shins vertical,
feet straight, and knees out. And remember, squatting, pulling, and push-
pressing movements are all great ways of building good jumping and
landing movement patterns.
     Note: If you are executing an upright torso jump—rebounding a
basketball, for example—remember that you have to drive your knees
out and create higher levels of torque to minimize compression forces
on your knees.




                                    395
1. If you’re trying to jump as high as possible from a stationary
   stance, position your feet underneath your hips—keeping your
   feet straight. Then go through the bracing sequence and raise
   your arms just overhead. Notice in the photograph how my
   arms are internally rotated. This will leave my shoulders in a
   stable position, helping me keep my back flat as I tilt my torso
   forward and swing my arms back.
2. To load up for the jump, tilt your torso forward, loading your
   hips and hamstrings, screw your feet into the ground, and
   drive your knees out. Keep your shins as vertical as possible.
3. Swing your arms overhead while simultaneously extending
   your hips and knees. If you glance at the photo, you’ll notice
   that my legs are together and my feet are pointed. This allows


                           396
           me to activate my glutes and keep my spine organized while
           airborne. Pointing your toes also sets you up for landing on
           the ball of the foot, which is ideal.
        4. As your feet touch down, create an external rotation force by
           driving your knees out and screwing your feet into the ground.
           Let your torso translate forward as you drive your hips and
           hamstrings back.


              KETTLEBELL SWING
     When it comes to learning complicated movements efficiently, the
key is to make them uncomplicated. We do this by breaking them down
into precise, manageable steps. Then we emphatically encourage like-
your-life-depends-on-it focus in performing each step. This is the path to
a tight learning curve. It’s the foundation required for optimal
performance. It’s also how you reduce the risk of injury.
     Consider the back squat. Instead of teaching the back squat as one
movement, we break it up into three distinct phases: the lift out, the walk
back, and the squat. This not only simplifies the movement and brings
consciousness to each step, but it also serves as a diagnostic test. Right
away, you can see if an athlete understands how to brace and create
torque in the early stages of their setup. If he fails to create torque off the
bar and doesn’t set his pelvis in a neutral position during the lift out, you
can work to correct that fault before he loads his spine. This is
extremely useful tool for the coach because you can start to correct
faults before your athlete initiates a full-range movement.
     The kettlebell swing is another example. In order to perform the
actual swing, which is the focus of the movement, you first have to lift
the kettlebell off the ground. This phase is no different than performing a
deadlift: brace, hinge forward at the hips with a flat back, create torque in

                                     397
the shoulders, and then stand up. It’s telling that people will fail to make
this connection and immediately begin from a bad position by bending
over with a rounded back, drive their knees forward, and lift the weight
up with unstable shoulders. No wonder so many people struggle with the
kettlebell swing. It’s not that they lack the motor-control or range-of-
motion to correctly perform the movement, they just set up in a bad
position.
    This is why layering category 2 movements is so important: It
allows you to see what an athlete’s default motor patterns are when
there is a dynamic stimulus. If you want to highlight why an athlete has
jumper’s knee, have him perform a kettlebell swing as a diagnostic test.
In two seconds, you will see him drive his knees forward instead of
pulling his hamstrings back, a fault that may have gone unnoticed in
category 1 but gets lit up in category 2.


Russian Swing vs. American Swing
     There are two different kettlebell swings commonly used in strength-
and-conditioning circles that are worth mentioning. There’s the
American swing and the Russian swing. The former requires that you
swing the kettlebell overhead, while the latter requires you to swing the
kettlebell to chest or head level. Both iterations are extremely helpful in
terms of assessing motor-control and mobility, but serve slightly
different purposes.
     The American swing obviously requires more shoulder, trunk, and
hip control so it illuminates more faults than the Russian counterpart due
to the increased range-of-motion demands. But you can’t handle as
much weight. And if you don’t have full range-of-motion overhead, the
American swing will exaggerate bracing and torque faults
(overextension in the top position, internal rotation in the shoulders). If
you don’t have a full range-of-motion, performing the American swing
just to reach some arbitrary range is not a particularly brainy move.

                                    398
Top-Down Setup




                 399
The Swing




            400
401
Torque Fault
    If you fail to create torque off the kettlebell handle, your shoulders will
always compensate into an internally rotated position. This is easily
fixed by addressing the top-down setup. However, if you’re missing
internal rotation in your shoulders, establishing a stable position with a
narrow grip is difficult to manage. If that happens, scale your grip by
grabbing the outside of the kettlebell handle. This will give your
shoulders some breathing room so that you can get into a good position.
But remember, this is not normal. You shouldn’t have to circumvent
your poor mobility by scaling movements. Get to work on improving
shoulder range-of-motion like it’s your job.

Motor-Control Fix:

          Use the top-down deadlift setup to pick the kettlebell off the
          ground.

                                     402
         Screw your hands into the handle and pull your shoulder
         blades back.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Posterior Shoulders and Lats
         Anterior Shoulders and Chest




                                 403
404
Scaling Your Grip
   If you can’t get your shoulders into a good position because you’re
missing internal rotation, you can buy yourself some breathing room by
grabbing the outside of the kettlebell handle.




                                 405
406
Head Fault
    Here’s a common scenario: An athlete sets up perfectly for the
kettlebell swing, but as he loads his hips and hamstrings to initiate the
movement (or receive the weight from the top position), he sacrifices
his neutral spinal position by throwing his head back. In most cases, this
fault occurs because the athlete is fighting against the down swing,
which pulls his torso forward. Throwing his head back is a way to
counterbalance that force and avoid falling forward—see hip hinge fault.
    Think about it like this: The kettlebell swing shares the same
movement pattern as the first 6-inches of a low bar back squat. The key
is to keep your head neutral and focus your gaze on the ground about six
feet out in front of you. If you’re looking straight ahead, you’re more likely
to commit this fault.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Keep your head neutral and focus your gaze about six feet out
          in front of your body.




                                     407
408
Hip Fault
     Another common fault is to follow the weight between your legs as if
you were hiking a football. This happens when an athlete fails to create
torque or brace, or if he has a weak lower back. As you can see from the
photos, I demonstrate a grossly exaggerated illustration of this fault.
However, it does happen, especially after the last rep. Instead of
controlling the weight down, an athlete will count his last rep at the top
position and release all tension in his shoulders and hips and let the
momentum of the weight pull him forward. This little gem is a great way
to finish a workout with a tweaked lower back. Remember, injuries often
occur in the beginning or at the end of an exercise. Make the right
decision. Start and finish the movement in a good position.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Don’t chase the kettlebell with your torso, look down, or
         release tension after completing your last repetition. Control
         the weight down to the ground as you would with a heavy
         deadlift.




                                   409
                  ONE-ARM SWING
    In my opinion, the kettlebell is better suited to the one-arm swings
than the classic kettlebell swing. It’s a surprisingly challenging
movement because there’s a rotational element that makes stabilizing
your shoulders and trunk difficult. For example, on the downswing, with
the kettlebell swinging between your legs, the momentum of the weight
pulls your shoulder into an internally rotated position. You have to resist
that force to keep your shoulder back.
    The one-arm swing also highlights an athlete’s strategy for
stabilizing the non-swinging hand. I know this is a mantra that I have
been chatting about throughout this book, but I’ll say it again anyway: If
you don’t create a stable position by bracing your spine and creating
torque in your primary engines, your body will find stability somewhere
else. You have to organize your opposite hand by making a fist or

                                    410
splaying your fingers, and wind your shoulder into the back of the socket.
This idea carries over to all single-arm, unilateral movements like one-
arm dumbbell pressing, dumbbell snatches, and the Turkish getup.
    The bottom line is this: It’s much harder to create stability in a single
shoulder, especially when there’s a dynamic element, than in two
shoulders. You can’t create torque off the implement so it really
highlights your understanding of fundamental movement patterns.
    Note: The setup is exactly the same as the double-arm swing in that
you use a top-down setup approach.




                                    411
Unstable Shoulder Fault (Hook Hand
Fault)
    As I just mentioned, if you don’t organize your free arm, it will contort
into some strange positions. Oftentimes, this is characterized by a hook
hand and grossly internally rotated shoulder. In addition to looking really
weird, it creates an open circuit fault, which travels through the kinetic
chain and makes it difficult to create and maintain stability.




                                    412
                           ROWING
    If you know how to deadlift with good form, rowing is simple. They
share the same load-order sequence and start position. So if I tell you to
row 1,000 meters, I want you to automatically think 60-80 deadlifts. This
not only makes it easier to sequence the right movement patterns, but

                                   413
also brings consciousness to each stroke.
    Unlike the deadlift, however, rowing is a low-resistance, high-
repetition exercise. In addition to adding speed, timing, and a metabolic
stimulus, you have to reconstitute the same start and finish position over
and over again. This is what makes rowing a minefield.
    Introduce speed and people start falling apart. Although the
consequences for rowing in a bad position are not as immediate as
deadlifting with bad form, there’s a cumulative effect. For example, say
you fail to drive your knees out, causing your ankles to collapse every
time you pull and return the handle to the start position. If you’re rowing
at thirty strokes a minute for 20 minutes, that’s six hundred collapsed
ankle compressions. You may get away with it for a while without
consequence, but injuries result over the long haul. It also grooves in
poor movement patterns.
    Here are the key takeaways of rowing. First, rowing highlights an
athlete’s ankle, posterior chain, and hip flexion range-of-motion. Two,
you can identify load-sequencing errors. It’s easy to see if someone is
loading his lower back and rounding forward instead of keeping his spine
rigid and assigning tension into his hips and hamstrings. Three, it helps
strengthen an athlete’s understanding of this principle—namely, if the
positioning of his head, shoulders, or spine is off, it’s impossible to
perform the movement with good form. Finally, it tests an athlete’s
coordination and ability to repetitively generate force from the same
position.
    Note: A lot can be said about the technical aspect of rowing,
especially the timing, but breaking into the minutia of things like stroke
rate moves beyond the scope of this chapter. My intention is to drive
home the relationship of bracing, torque, and movement transferability
as it relates to functional movements.




                                   414
Setting up: First, adjust the footboards so that the straps wrap around the
base of your toes. Second, tighten the straps around your feet, grab the
oar handle with both of your hands, straighten out your legs and slide
your seat back on the monorail. (Note: The idea is to take some of the
compression forces off your pelvis so that you can flatten your back.)
With your legs straight, sit tall, flatten your back, and then pull your
shoulder blades together and screw your hands into the handle. To
maximize torque, hook your thumbs around the handle. Keeping your
back flat, head neutral, and shoulders back, drive your knees out and
slide your hips and seat forward, allowing your torso to deviate forward
slightly. As with the deadlift, you want your shins vertical, shoulders
back, and hips loaded.



                                   415
Keeping your arms straight while still creating torque off the handle,
extend your knees, lean back slightly, and drive your hips back. To help
maintain a neutral head position, focus your gaze on the chain.




                                  416
As you extend your knees, pull the oar handle to your sternum. If you
examine the photo, you’ll notice that my forearms are nearly horizontal
and my shoulders are pulled back. If you were to flip the photo 90-
degrees in a counterclockwise direction, it would look a lot like the
bottom of the dip. Much of the same rules apply. You want to keep your
shoulders back, head neutral, and wrists aligned with your elbows.




                                  417
After a momentary pause, straighten your arms. Although this is
technically referred to as the recovery phase, you still want to create
torque off the handle and keep your shoulder blades pulled back.




                                   418
As your hands track over your knees, drive your knees out, hinge
forward at your hips, allowing your torso to tilt forward, and slide your
hips toward your heels. You should arrive in the same position that you
started.


Head, Spine, and Shoulder Fault
    Once you surrender head position, your back will round and your
shoulders will go soft. If that happens, force transmits to your back
instead of your hips and your shoulders internally rotate, affecting the
power of your pull. Other factors that can contribute to this fault include
missing shoulder range-of-motion and a tight thoracic spine.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Pull your shoulder blades together and screw your hands into
                                  419
         Pull your shoulder blades together and screw your hands into
         the oar handle to generate torque.
         To maintain a neutral head position, focus your gaze on the
         chain.
         Keep your back as flat as possible and your shins vertical.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Anterior Shoulders and Chest
         Posterior Shoulders and Lats
         Thoracic Spine




                                 420
421
Sequencing Faults
    The start position and initial pull phase of the row is similar to the
deadlift in that you simultaneously extend your knees and hips.
However, due to the speed and timing element of rowing, a lot of athletes
struggle with this sequence. Rather than move their body as a single
unit, they will either drive their hips back, leaving their torso forward,
and pull with their back, or they will lean back, leaving their knees bent,
and pull with their arms.
    This also happens during the recovery phase—when they return the
oar handle to the start position—but in the opposite order. They will
leave their hips back and lean their chest forward, or they will bend their
knees before they straighten their arms, forcing them to move the oar
handle over their legs. Regardless of the order or phase at which these
faults occur, it disrupts rhythm, compromises force, and can cause a ton
of problems up and down the athletic chain.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Move your body as a single unit and focus on extending your
         knees and hips at the same time.




                                   422
                 KIPPING PULL-UP
    The kipping pull-up is a gymnastic-based technique that combines a
back and forth horizontal swing with a pull. This swing is powered by a
leg kick and hip drive. The idea is to harness momentum along a
horizontal plane to make raising your chin over the bar easier to do. A lot
of strength-and-conditioning pundits criticize the kipping pull-up as being
unsafe. And they’re right, but only if it’s done incorrectly. The simple fact
is kipping pull-ups allow you to execute more repetitions in a shorter
span of time, but if performed improperly they will wreak havoc on your
shoulders, elbows, and lower back.
    So how do you kip without inviting injury?
    First, you need to have full range-of-motion in your shoulders,
meaning that you can hang from the bar with your elbows straight,
armpits forward, and spine braced in a neutral position.
    Second, you need to start with the strict pull-up and address the
basics before you start spastically swinging from the bar. Once you
have a fundamental understanding of how to form your grip and organize

                                    423
your body in a good position, you can start to layer the kip not only as an
exercise, but also as a way of assessing shoulder mobility and motor-
control. Say you see an athlete’s elbows bend and shoulders roll forward
while swinging from the bar. That’s a good sign that he a) doesn’t
understand how to set up and swing, or b) he’s missing end-range
shoulder flexion, internal rotation, or thoracic extension.
    Another reason why the kip is such a useful movement is that it fits
into our model of movement transfer exercises. If you glance at the
photos, you’ll notice that the back swing exaggerates a movement
pattern that is expressed in a lot of sport activities, specifically throwing
motions. For example, a tennis player’s serve, a volleyball player’s
spike, and a baseball player’s pitch all mirror the action of a kipping pull-
up. In addition, the dynamic opening and closing of the hips used in the
kip is similar to Olympic lifting techniques, like the clean and snatch.
The hip action of the kip is also a building block to other gymnastic
movements like the muscle-up.




        1. Jump up to the bar and establish a pull-up hook grip (see the
           strict pull-up). With your elbows straight and your armpits

                                    424
   forward, squeeze your glutes, pull your ribcage down, and get
   your belly tight. Position your legs together and point your
   toes.
2. Keeping your butt squeezed, armpits forward, and legs
   together, kick your legs back and pull your head and chest
   underneath the bar. Note: Squeezing your glutes prevents you
   from overextending your lower back. If you examine the
   photo, you’ll notice that Carl is in a globally arched position.
   Although his back is in extension, his spine is protected and
   he’s not in a compromised position.
3. With your armpits forward and your elbows locked out, swing
   your legs forward and push away from the bar.
4. Pull your hips back and push your shoulders forward.
5. Still squeezing your glutes and keeping your belly tight, swing
   your feet forward and push your body away from the bar.
6. As you swing back, pull your chin over the bar—keeping your
   elbows in tight and your spine neutral. Again, the idea is to
   harness the energy of your back swing to help raise your chin
   over the bar. To seamlessly transition back into your next
   rep, push yourself away from the bar and then as you extend
   your arms, pull yourself under the bar as demonstrated in
   steps 2 and 4. As with all category 1 and category 2
   movements, the way down should look exactly like the way
   up.


       SNATCH BALANCE
        PROGRESSION

                           425
     The snatch balance is an Olympic lifting exercise that isolates the
catch phase of the snatch. Specifically, it’s a movement that requires
you to transition from the top position of the back squat with your snatch
grip and quickly drop underneath the bar into the full overhead squat
position. The purpose of this exercise is to get athletes comfortable
receiving weight in the bottom of the overhead squat, which is the most
challenging and intimidating phase of the snatch. You have to
simultaneously organize your hips and shoulders into a good position
while maintaining a rigid spine and upright torso.
     It’s important to note that there are three versions of the snatch
balance technique, the first of which falls into a different category within
the movement hierarchy. Because these techniques follow a specific
progression and are typically layered as such, I thought it best to present
all three in sequential order. By lumping these movements together, I
hope to illustrate the small differences between each variation, as well
as illuminate why going from a category 1 movement (pressing snatch
balance) to a category 2 movement (heaving snatch balance, and snatch
balance) is so difficult.
     Note: The snatch balance progression can be done using a PVC
pipe. This makes it applicable to athletes of all ages and ability levels. If
you’re interested in seeing the common faults associated with the snatch
balance, revisit the overhead squat, on see here.


Pressing Snatch Balance
     The first progression in this series is the pressing snatch balance.
To correctly execute this technique, assume your overhead squat
stance, and without moving the bar, press yourself into the bottom of the
overhead squat. As you can see from the photos, Diane does not press
the bar over her head. Rather, she presses her body underneath the bar.
This is without question the most difficult category 1 movement because
it synchronizes two techniques, the press and the overhead squat.

                                    426
1. If you’re using a barbell, assume your snatch grip and take
   the bar out of the rack just as you would when performing a
   back squat.
2. Here you do several things at once. With your torso upright
   and spine neutral, sit your hamstrings back and sink your
   hips between your feet. At the same time, apply just enough
   upward force to the bar so that it stays in the exact same
   position. To help with this step, imagine pressing yourself
   underneath the bar, as if it were an unmovable object.
3. Keeping the bar in the same position, press yourself down

                          427
           into the bottom position. Your elbows should lockout overhead
           as your hips drop below knee level. The key is to maintain
           torque in your hips and shoulders by shoving your knees out,
           pulling your shoulder blades back, and positioning your
           armpits forward.
        4. Overhead squat the weight into the standing position.


Heaving Snatch Balance
    The heaving snatch balance is similar to the pressing snatch
balance, in that you drop underneath the bar into an overhead squat
without changing your stance (foot position). But instead of pressing
yourself underneath the bar from a dead-start, you add a dip and a drive,
the exact same technique used when performing a push-press or push-
jerk. The idea is this: Harness the energy from your hips to bump the
weight off of your back, and then drop underneath the bar into a full squat
with your arms locked out. Your focus here is speed, unlike the pressing
snatch balance, which you perform slowly.




                                   428
1. If you’re setting up for the snatch using a barbell, establish
   your snatch grip and then take the bar out of the rack just as
   you would when performing a back squat (see here).
2. Driving your knees out and keeping your torso as vertical as
   possible, sit your hips between your feet.
3. In one explosive motion, simultaneously extend your knees
   and hips. The idea is to harness the energy generated from
   your dip and drive to accelerate the weight off of your upper
   back, just enough to drop underneath the bar.
4. As the bar travels upward, drop into the overhead squat
   position. The goal is to arrive in the bottom position with your
   knees out, elbows straight, and armpits forward.

                            429
        5. Overhead squat the weight into the standing position.


Snatch Balance
    The snatch balance adds one more piece to the previous two
variations. Unlike the pressing and heaving snatch balance iterations,
which start and end in an overhead squat stance, the snatch balance
requires that you change the positioning of your feet as you drop
underneath the weight. So instead of remaining in your overhead squat
stance, you assume your pulling stance (deadlift, clean, and snatch
stance). Another way to think of it is that you start in your jumping stance
(deadlift) and finish in your landing stance (squat). This uncovers
another set of faults because you will notice that people will default into
an open foot position as they drop into the full squat to compensate for
their lack of mobility or their inability to create spontaneous torque. Put
simply, it’s a quick and dirty way to highlight an athlete’s range-of-
motion and understanding of torque and bracing.




                                    430
1. Secure your snatch grip on the bar and position it on your
   upper back as if you were performing a back squat. Then,
   position your feet in your pulling (snatch, clean, deadlift)
   stance.
2. Keeping your torso as vertical as possible, drive your knees
   out and lower your hips between your feet.
3. Extend your knees and hips simultaneously as if you were
   performing a vertical jump. The idea is to transmit power
   from your hips to your shoulders and bump the bar off the
   back of your shoulders.
4. Here you do several things at once. As the bar accelerates

                           431
  upward, drop into the bottom of the overhead squat, pressing
  your body underneath the bar. At the same time, slide your
  feet out into your landing stance (squat stance), immediately
  screwing your feet into the ground, and receive the bar
  overhead with your arms locked out. Keep your feet straight,
  your knees out, and armpits forward.
5. Stand up as if you were executing an overhead squat.




                          432
CATEGORY 3
MOVEMENTS




    433
Burpee




 434
Turkish Getup




    435
  Clean




Power Clean




   436
Hang Clean




Push-Jerk




   437
 Snatch




Muscle-Up




   438
                            BURPEE
    The burpee is basically a pushup, squat, and vertical jump layered
into one seamless movement.
    This makes it easy to identify where the problems are because you
already know what the start and finish positions look like. And by now
you should be able to identify the common faults. All you are doing is
reconstituting the same basic positions and reinforcing the same
movement patterns over and over again. The difference is you’re adding
transitions.
    Can you drop into a dynamic plank while keeping your trunk
stabilized and shoulders in a good position? Perform a pushup with
forearms vertical? Transition into the bottom of the squat with straight
feet, create spontaneous torque, and then jump with an upright torso?
    What’s interesting is people will show proficiency with the pushup,
squat, and jumping and landing techniques, but the moment you ask
them to spontaneously arrive in these positions, everything falls apart.
    Think about it like this: You essentially enter and exit three different
tunnels. If you start the pushup in a bad position, you will transition into
the squat in a bad position, and then by the time you jump, you’re a
broken mess. The faults from each movement compound the faults of
the subsequent movement. Make it a fast, high-repetition workout testing
stamina and the injury risk rises as the form degrades.
    You have to be able to reproduce the same stable positions with
accuracy and speed in every single repetition. It’s not a matter of how
much work you can get done, but rather how many quality repetitions
you can complete. So if the burpee is something that you do often (you
should), you need to organize the workout so that you approach the
exercise with care.
    I’ll use a CrossFit group class as an example. Say you’re coaching a


                                    439
group of athletes through a workout that calls for 25 consecutive
burpees. Rather than have them rip through 25 burpees in a row as fast
as possible—which will inevitably result in some burpees that bring to
mind dying animals—reconstruct the workout that awards athletes for
their movement quality, not who finishes with the fastest time.
     For example, pair them up into groups of two, and have one perform
a set number of burpees in a row while their partner silently counts a
point for every fault they commit. The goal is to get the lowest score
possible. It’s that simple.
     By simply changing the game of the workout, you change the
athlete’s mindset. Now he’s thinking about the quality of his movement
and reproducing the same good position over and over again, which is
what it’s all about!
     Another point worth mentioning is the universality of the burpee.
Following the theme of using strength-and-conditioning movements that
transfer to sport and life, the burpee is something that we tend to see a
lot in martial arts and fighting sports (think of an MMA fighter or wrestler
defending a takedown by sprawling his legs back and jumping back up to
his fighting stance). We also see it in sports like surfing and collision
sports like football.


 Scaling the Burpee
      Consider a soldier lying on the ground with an eighty-pound pack.
 What’s the most efficient way to stand up? It turns out that it’s not that
 different from a burpee. Get into the bottom of the pushup, get your
 forearms as vertical as possible, press up into a globally arched
 position, and then bring one leg up at a time and stand up. You can
 also lunge into the standing position. The goal is to get your foot flat on
 the ground, your shin vertical, and stand up with your spine in a well-
 organized, stable position. We use this same model in the gym for


                                    440
folks that can’t transition from the pushup to the bottom of the squat
with good form.
     Think of the scaled burpee as the formal expression of getting up
off the ground from your stomach.




      1. Start in your jumping stance and go through the bracing

                                  441
           sequence.
        2. Reach your hamstrings back, shove your knees out—keeping
           your shins as vertical as possible—hinge forward at the hips,
           and place your palms on the ground with your hands facing
           straight forward. The key is to keep your low back flat and
           sprawl or slide your feet back as your hands touch down.
        3. Jump your feet back and establish the top of the pushup.
           Remember to screw your hands into the ground, squeeze
           your butt, and keep your belly tight.
        4. As you lower your chest to the ground, keep your elbows in
           tight to your body and your shoulders aligned over your
           wrists.
        5. In one explosive motion, extend your elbows, drive your hips
           up as you reach full extension, and pull your knees toward
           your chest.
        6. As you pull your legs underneath your body, try to replace
           your hands with your feet. The idea is to land in the bottom of
           the squat with your feet straight, shins vertical, and back flat.
        7. Drive out of the bottom position of the squat and perform a
           vertical jump. Notice that my legs are together, my shoulders
           are back (armpits forward), and my toes are pointed. From
           here, I will land in my stance and transition right back into
           another burpee. To see how to land, revisit the jumping and
           landing technique.


Burpee Fail
   Because the burpee combines so many movements into one
seamless, coordinated action, there are a ton of faults that occur. For

                                    442
example, people will bend over with a rounded back, flop on the ground
in a broken mess, jump up into the dreaded dog poop position, burn their
knees standing up, and then donkey kick their legs back as they jump.
    It’s as if you combined all the deadlift, pushup, squat, and jumping
faults into one movement. Like I said before, it’s a disaster. If you see
anything that looks like the sequence here (and you probably will),
clearly the athlete doesn’t understand the concepts presented in this
book. The best approach, therefore, is to isolate each movement until
competency is reached.




                                   443
TURKISH GETUP

     444
     Martial artists—specifically Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu practitioners—refer
to the Turkish getup as the “technical getup.” It allows them to get up to
their feet using the least amount of energy possible, while giving them
options in terms of other movements they can employ.
     So that’s the critical everyday life application for the Turkish getup. It
teaches people how to get up off the ground in the most efficient way
possible. Imagine the value this has for an elderly person needing to get
to his feet.
     The Turkish getup is also an invaluable diagnostic tool. When I have
an athlete who is rehabbing from a shoulder injury, or if I simply want to
test his understanding of a stable shoulder, one of the first category 3
exercises that I will introduce is the Turkish getup. It forces him to lock
his shoulder in a stable position without the benefit of generating torque
off a fixed object like a barbell or the ground and to move through a full
range-of-motion. And unlike other category 3 movements, it’s performed
slowly, making it a safe and useful tool for driving home these concepts
of stability.
     At any point during the movement, you can stop the athlete and make
corrections to shoulder position. Not just with the arm overhead, but with
the supporting arm as well. The arm holding the dumbbell is expressed
with armpit forward, and the arm supporting your body is expressed
with shoulder back—screwing your hand into the ground. So it’s a nice
two-for-one shoulder diagnostic. In addition, you can start to see how
loss of shoulder position translates to other problems in the athletic
chain: If their shoulder is unlocked, chances are good that you’ll see their
ankles collapse, knees track inward, lumbar spine overextend, etc.




                                     445
446
447
                              CLEAN
    The clean tells you a lot about an athlete. Can he pull dynamically off
the floor with speed while maintaining a neutral spine? Can he
reproduce the same load-order sequence with every rep? Can he
practice stabilization through the trunk, hips, and shoulders while
transitioning from one position to another?
    With all of this additional complexity, it’s true that the possibility of

                                    448
making a technique error increases. But it’s also an opportunity to
improve performance and highlight potential weaknesses in your athletic
profile. This is the mindset that you need to cultivate as you start to
introduce, layer, and train category 3 movements.
    It’s like this: You can deadlift and front squat. That’s fantastic. Now
show me you can pull with speed and create torque off a fixed object
while it’s in motion. Show me you have the motor-control and mobility to
drop into the bottom of the front squat with speed and accuracy.
    If you want to pick something up off the ground and receive it onto
your shoulders, you need a model for learning and teaching that skill.
The clean is the formal blueprint for layering this movement pattern.


Bottom-Up Setup
     Unlike setting up for the deadlift, which works from the top-down,
you set up for the clean and snatch from the bottom-up. (To see the top-
down setup, revisit the deadlift in the category 1 section, see here).
There are some similarities in the load-order sequence: With the back
flat and shoulders pulled back, load your hips and hamstrings and use
your knees to adjust for position. But instead of bending over and forming
your grip with your hips and hamstrings on tension, you drop into the
bottom of the squat and set up from there.
     Here’s why: First, the bottom-up setup is used for Olympic lifts as it
allows you to optimize thoracic extension. By lowering into the bottom of
the squat, you can effectively pull your shoulder blades back—using the
bar as an anchor—and maximize tension in your upper back. Why is
this important? Simple: You’re setting yourself up to receive the load in a
good front rack position.
     You have to consider your finish position as you formulate your setup
strategy. It’s not just about entering the tunnel in a good position, but also
exiting the tunnel in a good position. By setting up in the same position
that you finish (bottom of the squat), you improve the stability of your

                                    449
receiving position.
    Secondly, the bottom-up approach allows you to prioritize an upright
torso position, which is critical in both the pull (lifting the weight from the
ground to hip and chest level) and catching phase (dropping into the
bottom of the squat while receiving the weight in the front rack).
    Most importantly, the bottom-up setup also gives you a template that
will yield the same reproducible results every single time you approach
the movement.
    Note: A lot of people don’t have the mobility to implement the
bottom-up setup. If that happens, the top-down approach is the best
option, and still quite functional—just ask some of the best weightlifters
in America. But it’s less than ideal because your upper back and
shoulder position aren’t in the most mechanically ideal position. Figure
out what’s holding you back and address the issue.




                                     450
451
A Bad Mix
    The top-down approach is without question the best setup for the
deadlift, but it doesn’t necessarily transfer as well to Olympic lifting. In
fact, Glen Pendalay—world-renowned Olympic lifting coach—doesn’t
allow his Olympic lifters to deadlift heavy singles because he believes

                                   452
 that the loss of upper back extension and deadlift “shoulders” wrecks
 their movement patterns for Olympic lifting.
     Although this is a sport specific approach, it fits with our ‘practice
 makes permanent’ philosophy. If you pull from a bent over position,
 you have to get your torso vertical as you pull the bar past your thighs,
 resulting in a forward hip thrust kettlebell-like action. This transfers
 your hip energy forward, instead of upward. What happens is athletes
 either miss the lift or have to jump forward in order to receive the
 weight.


                    POWER CLEAN
    If you’re an NFL lineman you need to know how to go from a 4 point
stance to a vertical torso with organized shoulders and ready to hit. You
have to do this near light speed. Learning how to power clean helps train
this motor pattern.
    The power clean is a scaled down iteration of the clean. Instead of
receiving the weight in the bottom of the squat, you receive the weight in
a quarter squat or top position. A lot of people don’t have the mobility to
clean, so the power and hang variants are a great way to dial in good
motor patterns.
    That said, there’s no excuse to avoid the full clean and snatch. If you
can’t drop into a clean or snatch, you need to figure out what is holding
you back and address the problem.
    The goal is to develop motor-control through a full range-of-motion. If
you’re consistently hiding the deficits of your motor-control and mobility
through shortened ranges, you’ll end up compensating into bad positions
when you’re forced into end-range positions. You end up failing at the
margins of your experience. To put it simply, you need develop the
motor-control at end-ranges.

                                    453
   Don’t hide your weaknesses. Park your ego, get hungry, and go after
them.




                                 454
                     HANG CLEAN
    Complex movements like the clean and snatch must be layered
accordingly. If you plan on taking the Olympic lifts seriously, you need to
isolate and practice each phase of the lift. For example, the hang
variants—starting from the standing position—allow you to focus on the
second phase of the pull (triple extension), the catch phase of the lift

                                   455
(front rack), and the landing.
    This is great for a few reasons: 1) By breaking the movement down
to a defined phase you shorten the learning curve; 2) it allows you to
highlight areas that are giving you trouble; and 3) you can get around
mobility issues (can’t set up or receive weight in the bottom position)
while still working on other aspects of the movement.




                                  456
457
Tension-Hunting Fault
    If you fail to shove your knees out or you’re missing flexion and
external rotation range-of-motion, your butt will shoot up as you initiate
the pull, causing an overextension spinal fault. This is your body’s way
of putting tension in the system. Take up the slack by driving your knees
out in the bottom.

Motor-Control Fix:
         Drive your knees out in the bottom position and load your hips
         and hamstrings before you initiate the pull.

Mobilization Target Areas:

         Anterior Hips and Quads
         Posterior High Chain (Glutes)
         Posterior Low Chain (Hamstrings)
         Calf and Heel Cord




                                   458
Early Pull Fault
    Once the bar moves past your knees, the goal is to get your torso as
vertical as possible so that you can open your hips into full extension.
This is what allows you to transmit upward energy from your hips to the
bar. If you’re bent over (implemented the top-down setup) or you’re
missing extension ranges of motion in your anterior chain (hip flexors,
quads), reaching full hip extension is difficult. What happens? You end
up pulling with your arms instead of harnessing the power of your hips.
    To correct this fault, implement the hang clean variant—deadlift the
weight to the standing position, lower to your thigh, and then pull—or just
work on extending your hips without transitioning into the receiving
position (clean pull). If it’s tight hips or quads that are holding you back,
pony up and get to work on those stiffened tissue.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Isolate the phase of the pull that is giving you the most trouble
          by implementing a clean pull or hang clean variant.
          Think about getting your elbows high after locking out your hips
          and shrugging your shoulders.

Mobilization Target Areas:

          Anterior Hips and Quads




                                    459
Next Rep Transition
    If you’re stringing together multiple repetitions, you need to be
conscious of your shoulder position as you lower the weight to the
ground. Think about keeping your shoulders back, screwing your hands
into the bar, and lowering into your start position. This will allow you to
seamlessly transition into your next rep without defaulting into a poor
position.




                                    460
Soft Shoulders Fault
    A lot of people mistakenly unlock their shoulders as they lower the
bar to the ground. As you can see from the photos, this compromises the
integrity of your spine and puts your shoulders in a bad position.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Keep your shoulders back and screw your hands into the bar

                                 461
as you lower it to your thighs.
Think about keeping your back flat and driving your knees out
as if you were initiating a hang clean.




                        462
463
                               JERK
    We have a saying around our gym: Your shoulders are abnormal
unless you can jerk.
    While it’s important to learn the basic, stable overhead positions, it’s
not enough to say you have full range-of-motion overhead, or that you
can press and push-press. To fully express the stability and
effectiveness of your overhead position, you need to be able to lockout
your arms, as well as spontaneously generate a stable shoulder position
(armpits forward) with speed and accuracy. Put another way, you need
to be able to jerk.
    If you can do that—lengthen and stabilize both of your shoulders
simultaneously—it shows that you understand the stabilization concepts
repeated throughout this book and have a model that translates to
dynamic overhead actions like swimming, throwing, blocking, etc. And
like all category 3 movements, the jerk highlights torque dumps and
force bleeds, as well as spotlights shoulder mobility issues that may go
unnoticed when implementing the basic overhead pressing elements.
    It’s important to mention that if you’re just learning how to jerk, it’s
helpful to get the bar from a rack. This allows you to optimize the setup
and isolate the movement. (To see how to take the bar out of the rack,
check out the front squat on see here.) However, if you plan on Olympic
weightlifting, you have to learn how to transition from a clean to a jerk.
To accomplish this, reset your feet back into your pulling stance and
adjust your front rack position by lowering your elbows. You want your
elbows to be at about a 45-degree angle (about halfway between a front
squat rack position and a strict-press rack position).
    As with the push-press, you use a dip and drive (bend and extend
your knees) to accelerate the weight upward. But instead of staying in
your jumping stance, you drop underneath the weight, catching it in


                                    464
either a squat (landing) or split squat position. Regardless of the
variation you implement, the goal is to receive the weight in a strong,
stable position at the apex bar height. For the average athlete, pausing
for a second in the lockout position is a valuable stimulus and allows the
coach to evaluate the quality of their position.


Push-Jerk
    The push-jerk variation allows you to evaluate vertical jumping and
landing mechanics with a dynamic overhead stimulus. The key to
correctly performing the push-jerk is to keep your torso upright, drive
your knees out as you dip and catch, and position your feet straight as
you go from a jumping to a landing stance. The faults to look out for
include lumbar spine overextension, knees forward, bent elbow and
internally rotated shoulder, and the dreaded donkey kick.
    Note: The push-jerk is often implemented in low-weight, high-
repetition workouts because it allows for a quick recovery and setup.
For most people, the split-jerk allows them to press more weight.




                                   465
1. Whether you take the bar out of the rack or clean the weight to
   your shoulders, the setup is the same: Butt is squeezed, belly
   is tight, feet are straight, and shoulders are back. If you glance
   at the photo, you’ll notice that Diane is in her pulling stance or
   jumping stance and has the bar balanced on her fingertips and
   deltoids. Her elbows are halfway between a strict-press and

                            466
           front rack position, about a 45-degree angle. Note: Your jerk
           grip width should be close to your front squat rack position.
        2. Keeping your torso as upright as possible, sit your
           hamstrings back slightly, drive your knees out, and lower
           your hips between your feet. The dip should look no different
           than the first 6-inches of a front squat.
        3. In one explosive motion, simultaneously extend your knees
           and hips into triple extension. As the barbell jumps off your
           shoulders, pull your head back slightly, just far enough to
           clear your face and maintain a vertical bar path.
        4. As the bar accelerates upward, slide your feet out into your
           landing stance—screwing your feet into the ground and
           shoving your knees out—and press yourself under the bar.
           Catch the weight with your elbows straight, shoulders back,
           and armpits forward.
        5. Overhead squat the weight into the top position.


Split-Jerk
    It’s a lot easier to maintain an upright torso and stabilize your
shoulders in the split stance. This is why you can likely move more
weight with the split variation of the jerk. (Unless you happen to be a
very competent Chinese Olympic lifter.)
    That’s wonderful, but the real magic with the split-jerk is that it gives
you a model for creating a stable hip position when one leg is in
extension—behind you—and the other leg is in flexion. Which is what it
looks like when you cut, run, or lunge.
    There are a few key points to keep in mind when performing the
split-jerk. The first is to create a stable foot position. To accomplish this,
land with both of your feet slightly internally rotated—meaning you turn

                                     467
your front foot toward the inside of your body with your weight centered
just in front of your ankle, and internally rotate your rear leg with your
weight centered over the ball of your foot. The front-foot position allows
you to create external rotation without your knee tracking too far out and
the rear foot puts your hip into a stable position, allowing you to support
an upright torso with a neutral pelvis position.
     Second, always draw your feet together at the finish of the lift by
moving your front leg first. Don’t rush this. Slide your lead foot back and
then step your rear foot into a squat stance. Master the habit of this
sequence in the same way you walk out the bar when performing a
squat.
     Third, unless you’re a competitive Olympic weightlifter, alternate
your stance. Become a switch-hitter of sorts. Sometimes jerk with your
left leg forward and other times jerk with your right leg forward. You will
have a side that is stronger than the other, which is natural. But just as a
good fighter practices from both a southpaw and orthodox stance and a
good skateboarder will switch from standard to goofy, a well-rounded
athlete should practice jerking from both stances.




                                    468
469
Open Foot Fault
    A lot of athletes, especially novices, will turn their back leg out as
they drop into the lunge position. This is a huge blow to force production
and, as you can see from the photos, puts your back leg into an awful
position. Like all movements, start out using a PVC pipe or light weight
and drill in the proper mechanics. If you can’t get into a good position
because you’re missing internal rotation of the hip, you know what to do:
Flip to the mobility section devoted to hip internal rotation and get to
work.


                                   470
   Note: You see this same open foot movement pattern in running.
The mobility prescription is the same: Start at the hip and work your
way down from there.

Motor-Control Fix:

         Focus on internally rotating your back leg with a slight knee
         bend.

Mobilization Target Areas:
         Posterior High Chain (Glute)
         Anterior Hip/Quad
         Posterior Low Chain (Hamstring)




                                  471
Knee Fault
    Dropping into a lunge position, especially when you’re first learning
how to jerk, feels unstable to a lot of people. To avoid dropping to depth,
athletes will often keep their back leg straight and overextend to keep
their torso vertical. As with most motor-control faults, you need to take a
step back and drill the movement using a PVC pipe, bar, or bar with a
light amount of weight. It’s that simple. If, while working on your
technique, you realize that the position is unattainable due to limited
mobility, figure out what’s holding you back and fix the problem. For this


                                   472
particular fault, tight anterior structures surrounding the hip are usually
to blame.

Motor-Control Fix:
          Think about bending your right knee and turning it toward the
          inside of your body. Remember, you want about a 45-degree
          bend in your legs.

Mobilization Target Areas:
          Anterior Hips/Quad
          Trunk




                                    473
474
                            SNATCH
    Nothing will tell you more about an athlete’s range-of-motion and
understanding of the midline stabilization and torque principles than the
snatch. It’s the ultimate assessment tool for the coach and consequently
the most challenging category 3 movement for the athlete.
    The snatch shares the same setup (bottom-up setup) as the clean,
but with a higher degree of motor-control and mobility. You have to pull
with a wider grip and receive the weight in an overhead position. In other
words, you have to get into a deeper squat and create torque off a wider
grip, adding another level of difficulty—screwing your hands into the bar
with a hook grip and maintaining that external rotation force as you go
from a pull to a stable overhead position is extremely difficult.
    This is why so many people struggle to stabilize their shoulders in a
good position, keep their torso vertical, and their spine rigid. If you make
the slightest error or if you are missing the smallest corner in your
mobility, everything falls apart.
    Note: What I suggest for the proper width of the snatch grip is this
rather critical notion: Grip it so that if things get sketchy you can dump
the barbell behind your back and avoid the weights smashing into your
skull. Shoulder flexibility is typically an issue when it comes to the
snatch grip and ideally you can work with your coach on figuring out
what’s best and what’s safest.




                                    475
476
477
478
                       MUSCLE-UP
     So you can do a strict pull-up and ring dip without struggle. Most
excellent. Can you combine the two movements into one seamless
coordinated action? Can you do it while keeping your back flat and your
shoulders organized?
     The level of trunk and shoulder control required to perform a strict
muscle-up is insane. Add a dynamic element like the kip, a dose of
fatigue, or string together multiple reps, and the resulting movement will
reveal any and all crappy motor-control habits.
     By the way, the rings don’t do you any favors. You have to cultivate
torque and maintain stability as you go from a pull to a press, a sort of
motor-control high wire act. It’s the equivalent of attempting a snatch
while balancing on a pair of rotating, shaking plates. The point is if you
don’t have a model for generating torque off of an unstable object, you’re
going to bleed force and get sucked into injury-prone positions.
     Just because you have a strict pull-up and a full-range ring dip


                                   479
doesn’t guarantee a muscle-up. As with all category 3 movements, the
challenge lies in the transition. To shorten the learning curve, we’ll often
have our athletes practice the transition with the rings low to the ground
so that they can use their legs to support their body-weight. We’ll also
layer in the heaving dip balance, which requires you to remove
connection with tension and drop from the top of the dip to the bottom of
the dip. This teaches them how to create spontaneous torque in the
bottom of the dip and prepares them for the muscle-up transition. In the
meantime, we make it a mission to develop shoulder rotational range-
of-motion.
    Note: The kipping muscle-up is performed in much the same way
as the kipping pull-up. (To see how to kip, revisit the kipping pull-up in
the category 2 movement section).




                                    480
481
482
483
484
                            CHAPTER 6
                       THE TUNNEL

    In the book The Score Takes Care of Itself: My Philosophy of
Leadership, legendary San Francisco 49ers football coach Bill Walsh
described the work ethic and relentless precision of Hall of Fame
quarterback Joe Montana. In the months before training camp, Montana
could be seen practicing basic drop-back patterns that would “bore a
high school football player” to death. He did this day after day, hour after
hour, over and over again. He began each drill by paying great attention
to his starting position. Then he’d work on mastering each and every
crisp, measured step of the pattern, never allowing himself to slide into a
compromised stance or take shortcuts. Montana disciplined himself
because he knew the importance of each fraction of each piece of
footwork—from the very beginning of the sequence to the follow-through
of a throw—to the success of a play.
    Montana employed a conceptual tool I like to refer to as the tunnel.
Having a tunnel mindset means understanding that you have to start a
movement (enter the tunnel) in a good position to finish (exit the tunnel)
in a good position. If you don’t start right, you won’t finish right—end of
story.
    The tunnel metaphor helps coaches and athletes identify, diagnose,
and correct movement and mobility problems. It brings consciousness,
intention, and purpose to the principles of movement.
    Military trainers use it routinely, even if they don’t call it that. For
example, recruits are often told, “Pay attention to detail,” a mandate they
are expected to obey in every phase of every drill. A successful drill
must begin with a perfectly executed start. If it doesn’t, the soldier earns

                                    485
a “no go” and starts the drill over, preceded perhaps by a set of penalty
pushups or a few runs up and down a mud hill. Military trainers know
that ingraining this acute focus during basic training can mean the
difference between life and death when that soldier is in the heat of battle.
      This focus is also at the heart of the tunnel approach. Here’s why:
Once an athlete is under a load, or has to bring speed or tension to the
equation, it’s very difficult for him to organize himself into a good
position. Let’s say, for example, that the athlete loads a barbell onto his
shoulders to perform a back squat, but fails to brace his spine in a
neutral position before taking the weight out of the rack. With the weight
compressing his spine, it’s nearly impossible for him to organize his
trunk in a braced-neutral position. Similarly, if an athlete with limited
range-of-motion or poor motor-control has to compensate during a setup
to a lift or mid-movement, his lift is compromised. In short, you can’t
turn a bad position into a good position once you’re in motion. Think
about it like this: If Joe Montana began a play with an inefficient stance,
he wouldn’t be able to execute a perfect drop.
      Here’s the other takeaway: If a coach notices the error when an
athlete is midway through a movement and cues the athlete to fix his
position, the athlete is helpless to comply. He may be able to salvage the
lift or complete the task, but he’ll struggle to assume the safest and most
effective stance. Take an athlete whose elbows drop during a heavy front
squat or full clean. Telling him to get his “elbows up” is useless. His
elbows will remain dropped until he stands up with the weight. Similarly,
if an athlete’s knees track inward during a heavy squat, you can shout
Knees out until you’re blue in the face, but it’s not going to have any
impact. By the same token, if someone starts rounding his or her back
during a heavy deadlift, it doesn’t matter how loud you scream Flat back!
That back is going to stay rounded for the duration of the lift.
      This is why it’s so important to prioritize your setup before you start
moving. The position in which you enter the tunnel (start a movement)
dictates how you will exit the tunnel (finish a movement). If you take the

                                    486
time to get yourself organized—brace your spine in a neutral position,
hinge from the hips and shoulders, and maximize torque—chances are
good that you will enter and exit the tunnel in a good position. But if you
enter the tunnel in a bad position, you have only two options: continue
moving in a compromised way or restart in a good position.


Identifying the Problem
     The tunnel concept also gives you a place to start your movement
assessment. It forces you to go back to your start position and make
sure you are setting up correctly. When I evaluate an athlete’s
movement, for example, I always look at his start position first because I
recognize that a poor setup can contribute to finish position faults.
     A while back, I worked with a champion Olympic lifter in my
physical therapy practice who was having a hard time locking out his
arms in the snatch. His coach implemented a slew of drills to help with
his finish position, but nothing seemed to work. It turned out that he was
missing shoulder internal rotation, causing his shoulders to round
forward during the pull. This is why he was having such a hard time
stabilizing his shoulders and locking out his arms overhead. He was
entering the tunnel in a bad position, which predisposed him to a bad
finish. As I’ve said before: Start out in a compensated position, finish
compromised. I cleaned up his shoulders, restored normal range to the
tissues that were restricting the joint, and all of a sudden the problem
with his finish position vanished. He could have done a million drills to
improve his lockout without ever getting to the root of the issue.
     The point is a lot of coaches and athletes mistakenly focus on drills
that will improve finish position when the real problem is the start. So
when an athlete tells you he’s having trouble completing a movement,
immediately assess his setup and make sure he’s not making a motor-
control error or missing key ranges of motion. In the same sense, if you
see a good setup, but your athlete is still having problems with his finish,

                                    487
chances are excellent that it is a mobility issue.
     As you start putting together mobility prescriptions, use the tunnel
mindset to help you focus your time on the areas that require the most
attention. The tunnel is a tool that forces you to evaluate position from
both sides of the movement. In fact, the start and the finish are the first
places to start your diagnosis when you are deconstructing a movement
problem. Just to be clear: “Start” and “finish” always refer respectively
to the bottom or top position of a movement. I call the start position MOB
1 (mobilization 1) and the finish position MOB 2 (mobilization 2).
     Let’s say, for example, that an athlete loses his balance and can’t
maintain a good position when he performs a pistol—single-leg squat.
Unless he can’t fully extend his hips, you can automatically rule out the
start (top) position as the limiting factor. The next step is to see if he can
get into a good finish position, which is the bottom of the pistol (squat).
He doesn’t even have to perform the movement. He just has to squat
down and extend his leg out in front of him. If he falls over or can’t get
into a stable, well-organized finish position, you know right away what
the problem is: he’s missing range-of-motion in his ankle. Now you can
focus on mobilizations that target his position of restriction.
     The tunnel also gives you a template for evaluating circular or
repetitive movements like running and swimming. Consider a runner
who is having problems with his landing—foot contacting the ground.
The coach might prescribe any number of running techniques and
motor-control drills to improve foot position. And these drills might work
for the initial foot contact. But if that athlete is missing range-of-motion in
his anterior hip, or his calf or ankle is super tight, his leg will externally
rotate into an unstable position. (This is an example of the second law of
torque see here.) He may be able to keep his foot straight at the start, but
as his leg swings behind him and externally rotates, he lands with an
open foot. He enters a brand new tunnel from a compromised position.
In this scenario, it’s not a start position problem; it’s a finish position
problem. The finish position—leg swinging back—dictates how well an

                                     488
athlete will enter his next stride and enter the next tunnel of movement.




     This is why when I watch people run, I not only pay attention to initial
foot contact, but also to their final foot position.
     The kipping pull-up is another perfect example of this. People have
difficulty linking kipping pull-ups because they lack full shoulder
extension and internal rotation. They will start their swing in a good
position—elbows locked out, neutral spine, shoulders back—but as they

                                    489
raise their chin to the bar, their shoulders roll forward, their elbows flare
out, and their ribcage tilts. So as they push away from the bar, their
shoulders are not in a good position to receive force. Now when they
swing underneath the bar, they can’t effectively transition into their next
rep because they are in such a wrenched position. Here’s what this
means for you: Your finish position on your pull-up dictates your ability
to transition into your next rep, which is your new start position.
     Put another way: If you exit a tunnel of movement in a bad position,
you will enter the next tunnel in a compromised position.




                                    490
                            CHAPTER 7
                     THE SYSTEMS

    “You need to stretch!”
    You’ve heard it a million times before. The perplexing assertion that
you’re not stretching enough and that it’s why you’re injured or sore,
slow or clumsy. Think of your first coach admonishing you to stretch
after practice, or your gym teacher preaching about the importance of
stretching. Oh, your back hurts? No problem! Just stretch your
hamstrings and it will feel better. You can’t get into a good squat position
because your quads are tight? Just stretch them out.
    Conventional wisdom tells us that if we want to optimize athletic
performance, improve flexibility, prevent muscle soreness, and reduce
potential for injury, we have to stretch. For a long time, stretching has
been a catchall modality for dealing with soreness and pain, for range-
of-motion restrictions, and for joint troubles. Just keep stretching. But
here’s the problem: Stretching doesn’t work by itself. It doesn’t improve
position, it doesn’t improve performance, it doesn’t make you faster, it
doesn’t eliminate pain, and it doesn’t prevent injury. That’s why when
you dutifully complied with your coach’s order to stretch after class, you
didn’t become a better athlete or all of a sudden stop getting injured.
    Let me clarify: When I say, “stretching,” I’m referring specifically to
end-range static stretching, or hanging out in an end-range static position
with zero intention. I’m talking about purposeless stretching. Consider
the classic hamstring stretch: You lie on your back, grab your ankle, pull
your hamstring to end-range, and then hang out while you dreamily
watch the geese overhead flying south for winter. This type of
“stretching” can theoretically “lengthen” your hamstring, but doesn’t tell

                                    491
you—or your coach—anything about your motor-control or your ability
to get into good positions. In other words, taking your hamstring to end-
range and keeping it there is not going to help you run faster or change
your capacity to deadlift more weight. Yet when most people have a
tissue or joint restriction that prevents them from getting into a good
position, they think, “Man, I suck! I need to stretch.”
     An example by way of analogy: If you pull on each end of a T-shirt,
what happens after a minute or so? It becomes all stretched out, right?
What do you think happens when you take your beautiful tissues to end-
range and keep them there? They get all stretched out like your pitiful T-
shirt. Imagine lengthening your hamstrings and then sprinting down a
field or attempting a max-effort deadlift without developing the strength
or motor-control to handle that new position. You might as well get down
on your knees and beg to be injured. “Lengthening” your muscle is not a
bad thing if you have the motor-control to support that end-range position
and you are expressing those end-range positions with load-bearing,
full-range exercises. This is why we deadlift, squat, and practice full-
range functional movements in the gym.
     The issue is not that static stretching lengthens the muscle. The
issue is that it addresses (albeit poorly) only one aspect of your
physiologic system—your muscle. It doesn’t address motor-control, or
the position of your joints, or what’s going on at the joints. It doesn’t
address sliding-surface function—that critical interplay of how your skin,
nerves, and musculature react with one another. Any of these things
could look like tight musculature. And that’s why “stretching it” has been
the good, old-fashioned Band-Aid we have always applied. And if
“stretching muscles” works so well, why do we still see as much
dysfunction and pain as we do?
     If stretching is not the answer, what is? In short, we need to
systematically deal with each of the problems that prevent us from
getting into the ideal positions and keep us from moving correctly. That’s
what I’m going to cover in this chapter. I want to show you a system for

                                   492
addressing all of the components that limit position and challenge
movement efficiency. This way, you’ll be able to solve your particular
problem(s) and see measurable improvement.
     This passage from Supertraining, by Yuri Verkhoshansky and Mel
Siff, helps put this idea into perspective:
     “…the nature of flexibility generally is not adequately appreciated.
Flexibility, whatever people mean by that term, differs from joint to joint,
displays different properties during dynamic versus static condition, and
concerns not only muscles but all components of the muscle skeletal
system, as well as the various types of stretch reflex in the
neuromuscular control circuits of the body.”
     Of course, few people think in terms of body systems because the
“just stretch it” paradigm remains so prevalent. It’s time to move beyond
this simplistic outmoded notion of flexibility and start thinking about the
aspects that impede position and how position relates to performance.
To help people make this transition, I have deleted the words
“stretching” and “flexibility” from my vocabulary and replaced them with
“movement” and “mobility”—or “mobilization.”
     I define mobilization as a movement-based, integrated, full body
approach which takes into account all of the elements that limit
movement and performance. These include short and tight muscles, soft
tissue and joint capsular restriction, motor-control problems, joint
range-of-motion dysfunction, and neural dynamic issues. In short,
mobilization is a tool to improve your capacity to move and perform
efficiently.
     This perspective gives me a clean slate from which to talk about the
problems with movement restrictions in a more holistic way. The idea
is to get you to stop thinking that stretching is important. Are you truly
ready for this? Stretching is not important. Position and the application of
position through movement is what matters most. If you can’t get into a
good position because you’re limited or you have a tissue restriction of
some kind, stretching alone won’t give you the results you want. What

                                    493
will give you results is a system that helps you to figure out which of the
variables are compromising your ability to move correctly, and then,
once you’ve diagnosed the problems, effective modalities or techniques
to resolve each of them.


A Movement-Based Approach
      There’s no one-size-fits-all modality when it comes to range-of
motion-restrictions or tight muscles. In fact, it’s best to combine
techniques as often as possible and take a systematic approach so that
we can address all positional and movement-related problems, soft
tissue stiffness, and joint restrictions.
      It’s like this: A chiropractor, orthopedist, osteopath, or a joint-nutty
physiotherapist cannot solve all the issues in your tissues and joints.
Neither can a massage therapist or other body worker. A strength-and-
conditioning coach might be a genius when it comes to teaching perfect
movement, but that is only one variable in the equation. Does this mean
you shouldn’t work with a coach, consult a doctor, or get a massage?
Absolutely not. You should seek the expertise of professionals in various
fields so that you know which modality works for you.
      I find that few people have a model for performing basic maintenance
on their body. When someone comes to me for treatment, for example,
I’ll always ask, “What have you done to alleviate the problem?” And nine
times out of ten he or she will shrug and admit, “Nothing.”
      People need a go-to safe plan so that they can take responsibility for
their own dysfunctions. And that safe plan starts with position and
movement.
      To reiterate, you should always go after positional and movement
mechanics first, and treat the symptoms after. There are several
reasons for this. For starters, if you can get into a good position and
move with good form, mechanical inefficiencies automatically
disappear, which means that a lot of potential overuse injuries are

                                    494
nipped in the bud. It’s like curing a disease without having to treat the
symptoms.
    Second, when you have good movement and motor-control, your
body can deal with tissue restriction and can weather bad mechanics
longer. The bottom line is that you can’t mobilize—apply a mobilization
technique—and resolve all of your problems all at once. It’s an all day,
every day endeavor. People sit in cars, work at desks, and train as if
they were world-class athletes. That’s a whole lot of movement to
manage. Change takes time. But if you understand how to move
correctly, you can at least mitigate movement errors that have the
potential to cause injury and buy yourself some time to work on the
compromised tissues.
    Third, your body adapts to whatever positions and movements you
put it in throughout the day—whether you’re driving your car or doing
burpees. If you move with good form and allow your joints and tissues to
assume stable positions—whether you’re picking up groceries or
deadlifting in the gym—you will ingrain functional motor patterning and
have fewer tissue and joint restrictions. However, if you, say, slouch or
overextend while doing whatever needs doing in your life, your body will
adapt to those poor positions, causing your tissues to become adaptively
and functionally short, resulting in some sort of biomechanical
compromise. When the joint is in a bad position, the surrounding
musculature will adapt to that working position; this is what I mean by
adaptively and functionally short. For example, if you sit in a chair every
day, your hip flexors, overtime, will become adaptively short and stiff.
With that understanding, you can devise an antidote: Implement
mobilization techniques that target the front of your hips every day to
undo the destructive nature of sitting, or convert to a standing
workstation. The latter being a much better option.


 Skin-Pinch Test
                                   495
     There’s a really simple test you can do to illuminate how your
 body compensates to adaptively short tissues. It’s called the skin-
 pinch test. Stand up, hinge from your hips, and grab a handful of skin
 around your hip flexors. Now stand up. What happens? You have to
 overextend and keep your knees bent to lift your torso upright. This is
 exactly what happens when you sit for long periods of time. Your hip
 flexors start to reflect your working position, becoming adaptively
 short and stiff.

     By standing in a good position as opposed to sitting, you eliminate the
need to mobilize the same stiff tissues over and over again. Instead you
can spend your time fixing other positions and addressing other issues
(i.e., the bottom of the squat or your deadlift setup).
     Let’s use a simple example to help clarify my point. Consider an
athlete training for a half marathon who experiences hip pain six miles

                                    496
into a run. The fact that she doesn’t experience pain until six miles,
maybe forty minutes, into her run means that she is either not strong
enough to maintain good form for a prolonged period of time or that her
body can mitigate her poor mechanics for only six miles. It’s not a
mobility-related restriction problem; it’s a movement problem. Of
course, implementing a mobilization technique to address the pain is
important, but only in the short term. It might provide immediate relief,
but it won’t prevent her hip pain from flaring up the next time she goes
out for a long run. Simply mobilizing her hip is like taking a pill to mask
a symptom but not actually curing the disease.
    In this scenario, what this athlete really needs to do is address her
running mechanics and make sure she’s strong enough to maintain good
form throughout the race. Once she learns how to run correctly and
develops the strength to maintain good form, her hip won’t get tight and
pissy. And even if her hip does tighten up (hips inevitably get tight during
long runs), she can prolong the onset of pain or maybe even prevent it
altogether because she’s moving efficiently.
    The fourth reason for prioritizing movement and motor-control is that
they dictate and guide your mobility program. Put another way, they
dictate the position you have to change and the position that you need to
mobilize. Otherwise you’re just guessing. I call this the press-and-guess
model: press or pull on something (without knowing what it does) and
hope it works. For example, say you can’t get your knees out or
maintain a rigid spine at the bottom of the squat. This is what I call a
“position of restriction.” To improve the bottom of the squat, it makes
sense to mobilize in a position that looks like the bottom of the squat. If
you’re unable to raise your arms overhead, you should probably
mobilize in a position with your arms overhead.
    You also need to take into account good movement mechanics as
you mobilize, which is only possible if you understand what good
positions look like. In other words, you will never maximize the benefits
of mobility if you don’t understand how to organize your body in a good

                                    497
position. For example, say you are missing the capacity to stabilize your
shoulders in a good overhead position. To improve shoulder function,
you need to not only mobilize your shoulders with your arms overhead,
but also cue external rotation. If you mobilize only the overhead
component, you’ll miss the most important stabilization piece, which is
rotation. Similarly, if you understand that your knees should not track
inward and that you should see a good arch in your foot, you can carry
that idea over to mobility.
     Correct human movement is not open to debate. Technique is not
some theoretical idea about the best way to move; it provides the means
to fully express human movement potential in the most stable positions
possible. If you understand what they are, you will incorporate all the
elements—joint, fascia, musculature, etc.—automatically engaging
several systems at once, meaning that you will address tissue
restriction at the joint and in the muscle.
     The question is: How do you go about addressing mobility once
you’ve taken motor-control off the table? To answer this question we
have to take a closer look at the mobility systems at work. I’ve broken
them into three categories: joint mechanics, sliding surface, and muscle
dynamics.


The Mobility Systems
    Although most mobilization techniques encompass more than one
system (if you address joint mechanics, you will also affect sliding
surface), it’s helpful to understand how each system works.

   This is the mobility checklist:

          Joint mechanics
          Sliding-surface dysfunction
          Muscle dynamics

                                     498
    The idea is to use mobilization techniques that address each system
and work through the checklist until you’ve corrected your areas of
restriction and resolved your pain.

Joint Mechanics
    When I treat an athlete in my physical therapy practice, I always
make sure that he can get into a good position before I do any kind of
mobility work. However, if it’s clear that he is missing major ranges of
motion—meaning that I’ve taken motor-control off the table as being a
limiting factor—I tend to go after the joint first because if I can set the
joint in a good position, a lot of the problems (soft tissue restriction,
sliding-surface dysfunction) automatically go away.
    Say I’m treating an athlete who has anterior shoulder pain because
he doesn’t have enough internal rotation, meaning that his shoulders are
consistently rounded forward. (When you’re missing shoulder internal
rotation, you compensate into a rounded forward position.) This puts the
external rotators of his shoulders in a state of constant stretch and
causes his pecs to become adaptively and functionally short. Now I can
mobilize the long, stiff musculature that is overstretched and weak and
restore normal range-of-motion to the short tissue of his pecs, but until I
resolve the dysfunctional mechanics of his shoulder, weakness and
tightness in the tissue will always be an issue.
    A much more effective approach is to put his shoulder in a good
position. And that starts with thoracic mobility; if I don’t fix his spinal
position, I will never get to the bottom of his dysfunctional shoulder
position. Once I restore suppleness to his thoracic spine, I create the
conditions for his shoulder to assume a good position. In most cases, his
external rotators will turn back on and his pecs will return to their
normal working state. When you put the joint into a good position, all the
muscles turn on the way they’re supposed to and pain tends to
disappear.
    The question is: How do you mobilize a joint? There are a few tools

                                   499
that you can use to reset a joint into a good position, which I will discuss
shortly. But before I delve into the methods or techniques, let’s discuss
the component that compromises joint and tissue mobility and ultimately
joint stability—the joint capsule.
     When it comes to tissue and joint restriction, one of the first things
you have to look at is the joint capsule. The joint capsule is a
ligamentous sac (thick and leathery fibrous tissue that connects bones
and cartilages at a joint) that completely surrounds the joint. This bag of
tissue creates an internal environment for freedom of movement. It also
helps create stability, keeping the joint itself from overstretching.
     What people tend to forget (or don’t fully understand) is that this
strong, supportive sac can get tight and adaptively short when the joint is
put into bad positions for prolonged periods of time. This ultimately
affects joint range-of-motion and tissue health. Going back to the
previous example, if your shoulders are rounded forward, chances are
good that your joint capsule is extremely tight. Similarly, if you sit for an
extended period of time, the fronts of your hips will become adaptively
short and tight. What happens? You can’t pull your shoulders back into a
stable externally rotated position, and you can’t extend your hips. Now
you can mobilize your pecs to feed slack to your shoulders, and you can
try to lengthen the fronts of your hips, but that deals only with the
musculature; you are not accounting for what is happening in the joint
capsule.
     To help you understand this, imagine a rubber band that is fat on one
end and skinny on the other. If you pull on that rubber band from both
ends, what happens? The skinny part stretches, but you get only a little
bit of stretch from the thick end. Your tissues will similarly stretch at
their weakest point. This is why people feel a big stretch in the back of
their knees when they stretch their hamstrings; the weakest end of the
muscle is where it inserts behind the knee. Well, your joint capsules
represent the thickest part of the rubber band. In order to effect change
within the joint capsule, you need to create space within the joint. We do

                                    500
this by creating a banded distraction. Physical therapists have done this
manually for a long time, but the band allows you to do it yourself.




                                   501
You can create a banded distraction from your wrist or ankle, your hip or
shoulder.

   As you can see from the photos, the band can be used two ways. You
can hook it around your wrist or ankle, or you can hook it around your

                                  502
shoulder or hip. The former allows you to pull the joint surfaces apart so
that you can reset the joint into a good position; the latter helps
encourage motion through the joint capsule so that you can restore intra-
joint articulation (meaning, how the joint moves inside the joint capsule)
and puts your joint in a good position.
    The third way to address joint capsule restriction is to simply force
the joint into a good position and then add rotation. For example, if you’re
having some funky shoulder-impingement pain or restriction, try forcing
your humerus into the back of the socket—using a band or a kettlebell—
and then externally rotate and internally rotate your arm. This will reset
your shoulder into a good position and help you reclaim rotational range-
of-motion.




Floor-pressing a heavy kettlebell while actively pulling your shoulder to
the back of the socket will help reset your shoulder in a good position.
Internally and externally rotating your arm will help restore rotational
range-of-motion.

    Another way to treat a stiff or painful joint is to create a gapping or
compression force around the compromised area. Going back to the
hinge analogy, if there’s a tight hinge on a door, there will be a little pile
of hinge dust. The flexion-gapping method, which is used only at the

                                      503
elbow and knee joints, decompresses some of the joint surfaces and
restores motion. Pulling the joint apart helps blow away the hinge dust
and resets the joint into a good position. You can also wrap a
compression or the dreaded and magical voodoo band around the joints
for a similar effect.
     As a quick recap, you can address joint mechanics using three
different methods: you can force the joint into a stable position, you can
pull the joint surfaces apart by using a band or the gapping technique, or
you can compress the joint. Remember, if you are not actively
mobilizing your joint capsules, you’re leaving a huge chunk of tissue
restriction on the table.




                                   504
Rolling up a towel and placing it in the crevice of your knee is one way to
create a gapping effect to restore motion and decompress some of the
joint surfaces that restrict flexion range.

Sliding-Surface

                                   505
     After you check joint mechanics off the list, the second system you
should address is sliding-surface dysfunction.
     Sliding surface is a catchall phrase I use to describe how the
different components, structures, and systems of the body relate to one
another. To ensure suppleness, your tissue—skin, nerves, muscles, and
tendons—should all slide and glide over each other. Your skin should
slide over the underlying surface layers (bone, tendon, muscle), your
nerves should slide through your nerve tunnels (muscle), and your
tissues should slide around your joints.
     To test this idea, take your index and middle fingers, press down on
the top of your opposite hand, and move your skin around in all
directions. What you will notice is that the skin slides over the
underlying bone and tissue. To a lesser degree, this is how your skin
ought to slide over all the surface layers of your muscle, tendons, and
bone.




Your skin should slide unrestricted over the back of your hand.

    For example, if you pull your toes toward you in dorsiflexion, you
should be able to pinch or slide your skin over the back of your Achilles
tendon. You can also test the sliding surfaces around the outside of your
knee, thigh, and ankle, and around the tip of your elbow. If your skin does
not freely glide over what’s underneath it, you’ve basically created an

                                   506
external cast—a cast around your system. Isn’t that a dreamy image?




Although you don’t have as much skin elasticity around your joint, your
skin should still slide unrestricted over your elbow, and outside of your
knee, thigh, ankle, and heel cord.

     Imagine wearing a really tight pair of jeans and then trying to squat to
full depth. Not going to happen, right? Your skin is like those really tight
jeans. This is exactly what happens to your glutes when you sit down for
prolonged periods of time. The bundles of muscle stick to one another
and become unresponsive, limiting their ability to contract. This is why
when people sit extensively they have trouble fully activating their glutes
to stabilize their pelvis and achieve a neutral spinal position.
     To restore the slide to surfaces (sliding surfaces), you have to
unadhere that skin to the underlying tissue or bone using sliding-surface
mobilization techniques (like the pressure wave, smash and floss, and
ball whack). There are a number of different tools you can use, the most
common being a lacrosse ball, roller, or voodoo band. You can also
have a Superfriend smash your quads and big muscle groups by

                                    507
creating shear force—grinding pressures—across the muscle. What
you have to remember is that sliding-surface dysfunction can cause a
ton of problems down the road, and no amount of stretching will alleviate
it. The only way to unadhere matted-down tissue is to unglue the skin
and superficial and deeper layers of muscle using large shearing forces
across the skin and muscle.

Muscle Dynamics
     If I’m running a diagnostic on a patient or athlete and I’m working
sequentially through the mobility checklist, by the time I fix his or her
motor-control—position or movement error—clear joint capsule
restriction, and restore sliding surfaces to overly tight tissues, I’ve
usually already restored normal range-of-motion and I haven’t had to
stretch anything. This is why muscle dynamics is the last system on the
mobility checklist.
     Let me say here that the muscle dynamics component uses
mobilization techniques that look a lot like traditional stretching shapes.
But let me be clear: Muscle dynamics is not stretching as I’ve classified
it. We’re not just putting the tissue to end-range and hanging out for a
while, hoping that something changes. Rather, we’re using an active
model—applying tension at end-range—to help facilitate change in the
tissue and restore some muscle contraction. And, more important,
we’re always biasing or emphasizing positions that look like the
positions we’re trying to correct. If you’re restricted in the bottom of the
squat, you want to mobilize in a position that looks like the bottom of the
squat.




                                    508
When possible, always mobilize in a shape that closely resembles the
position you’re trying to change.

    The muscle dynamics system is how we lengthen muscles or
increase range-of-motion for athletes who need to get into extreme
positions, like dancers, gymnasts, and martial artists. Don’t confuse this
with growing new muscle. I say this because I’ve seen people fall into
the trap of thinking that they can grow new muscle by stretching. The
fastest way to grow or lengthen muscle is to perform full-range loaded
movements. If your hamstrings are “tight” for example, deadlifting and
squatting will not only stimulate hamstring growth, but also build motor-
control and strength at new end-ranges.
    When you restore range or function to the joint or tissue, you need to
reflect that change back into your motor-control program. If you improve
your overhead shoulder range-of-motion by 5 percent, and you use it in
the gym, you will more than likely retain that range-of-motion. It’s not a

                                   509
mysterious process.
    When muscles are working within limited ranges of motion they
become functionally short. Consider an elite cyclist who spends half of
his day on a bike. His ankles are locked in a neutral position and his hips
are stuck in a closed position. By the time he gets off his bike after a long
ride, his muscles have adapted to that working position. This is where
muscle dynamics and methods like contract and relax—forcing tissue to
end-range, contracting the muscle, and then relaxing to get a little bit
more range—fit into our paradigm of solving problems. If you’re stuck in
a car for two hours, undoing the sitting by spending some time at end-
range hip extension (using the contract and relax model) to restore
normal length to the tissue is the way to go. That doesn’t mean hanging
out in a static position but actively oscillating in and out of end-range
tension and using a band to approximate your hip into a good position.
    My rule of thumb is to prioritize motor-control, joint capsule, and
sliding surfaces before training, and to save some of the muscle
dynamic end-range mobilization techniques for after training. This way,
you’re warmed up and your tissues are prepped for the mobility work.
We hear athletes say that they are afraid of stretching before they work
out, and that’s a reasonable fear. In fact, static end-range splits before
you squat heavy is probably not a good idea.
    Now that you understand the mobility systems and you have a
blueprint for solving problems, let’s take a closer look at the actual
techniques or methods that you’ll use.


Mobilization Methods
    While there are several techniques you can use within the
framework of the mobility systems, it’s important to realize that there is
a dynamic relationship between mobility systems and mobilization
techniques. If your joint capsule is altered using a joint capsule
mobilization, for example, the soft tissue surrounding the joint will

                                    510
probably also be affected. Similarly, if you restore sliding surfaces to
your tissue using a smashing technique, your joint mechanics and
muscle dynamics will probably improve.
    But just as a carpenter has a tool for a specific job, there are specific
mobility techniques for specific systems. There are techniques that
focus on improving position and others that are meant to restore length
to shortened tissue. In addition, there are mobilizations that offer a more
acute pinpoint approach, and some that address an entire muscle group.
    You need different methods so that you can cover all the different
components of your restriction. So don’t limit yourself to just one
technique. Most of these methods can be used in combination. Let’s say
you’re working on restoring sliding surfaces to your glutes. You can use
the contract and relax method to sink into the deeper layers of tissue,
pressure wave across the stiff musculature, and then smash and floss
over knotted down tissue. Mix and match in the way that gets the job
done and affects the greatest amount of change in the shortest period of
time.

Pressure Wave
    The pressure wave uses a pinpoint-focused approach for working
through deeper layers of muscle and connective tissue like fascia. It’s
like using a little chisel to pick away at knotted-up pockets of tissue, as
opposed to using a sledgehammer to break up large muscle masses.
    To correctly execute this technique, lie on a ball or roller while
remaining completely relaxed—the goal is to sink into the deepest levels
of your muscle tissue. Next, create a pressure wave by slowly rolling
the targeted area over the ball or roller using the full weight of your body.
This is the equivalent of a structural-integration therapist or Rolfer
pressuring an elbow slowly through the length of your hamstrings or
quads. Go slow and keep the full weight of your body distributed over the
ball or roller, so your tissues have a chance to yield to the ball (relax).
As a rule, the slower you move the more pressure you can handle and

                                    511
the more positive effects the tissues will receive. If you move fast and
keep your muscles engaged as you roll around, your efforts will be futile.




Get all of your weight over the ball or roller and slowly roll the tissues
you are trying to change over the object, creating a pressure wave
across the knotted-up area.

Contract and Relax
     The contract and relax method is based on the scientifically
established use of proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF)
stretching. You can use this method to restore normal range-of-motion
to shortened tissue, or to get deeper compression during sliding-surface
mobilization. Here’s how it works: If you are focusing on muscle
dynamics, build tension at end-range for five seconds, release tension,
and move into a new range for ten seconds. If you are focusing on sliding
surfaces, identify a tight area (an area in which you can’t surrender your
full weight on the ball or roller) and then engage that muscle for no less
than five seconds. After five seconds of tension, immediately relax,
allowing the affected tissue to sink deeper into the pressure of the roller
or ball.




                                    512
Using your hands to keep your leg in the same place, create tension by
driving your leg away from you and hold that tension for five seconds.
After five seconds, release tension and move into a new range for ten
seconds.

Banded Flossing
     The easiest way to deal with muscle stiffness is to put the joint into a
good position using a Rogue monster band. Remember, your tissues
adapt to your working positions. So if you sit all day, not only will your
hip flexors become adaptively short, but the head of your femur will also
move anteriorly in the hip capsule instead of remaining in the center of it,
where it belongs. Every time you perform deep-flexion-based
movements, the head of your femur hits the edge of your acetabulum
(hip socket). This is why people feel an impingement or pain in the front
of the hip when they squat or mobilize in positions that close that joint.
Using a Rogue monster band to create a distraction will pull the head of
the femur back to the center of the capsule and effectively clear that
impingement so that you can move into newly challenged ranges without
discomfort.




                                    513
By creating a lateral or posterior distraction, you can effectively clear hip
impingements, allowing you to move into deeper flexion ranges, as well
as account for joint capsule restriction.

    The band also helps you manage joint capsule restriction. Because
the joint capsule is so thick and robust, you need a little extra tension to
get a stretch through it. Going back to the rubber band analogy, you need
to account for the thick end of the rubber band to create an equal stretch
throughout the muscle.
    Banded flossing is also one of the best ways to prep for dynamic or
loaded movements. (Note: “Flossing” refers to movement.) For
example, say you’re trying to mobilize the front of your hip. The first step
is to wrap a band around the back of your upper thigh and create an
anterior distraction (pull your hip forward). The next step is to get into a
lunge position and perform split squats by lowering and raising your
back knee. If you don’t feel anything, guess what? You probably have full
range-of-motion. But if you find that you can’t get your hip into extension
or you feel a big stretch in the front of your hip, chances are that your hip
capsule is restricted. Although mobility doesn’t technically count as a


                                    514
warm-up for movement, banded-flossing mobilizations like the banded
split squat is a great prep for loaded and dynamic movements.




By mobilizing tissues within the context of full-range movement, you
restore normal range to short and stiff tissues and affect multiple tissue
systems.

Smash and Floss
    Smash and floss allows you to “tack” down or apply pressure to an
area of painfully knotted tissue. Once a “tack” has been applied to the
affected tissue, “floss,” or move, the limb around in every direction
through as much range-of-motion as possible. This method is very
similar to active-release treatment (ART), trigger-point therapy, or
shiatsu, in that it focuses on trying to restore sliding surfaces by using
movement to unglue the deep mechanical restrictions in the tissue.




                                    515
After a tight area has been identified, get maximal pressure (weight)
over a ball, roller, or barbell, and then move your limb through as much
range-of-motion as possible, thereby flossing the compressed tissues.

Paper-clipping (Oscillation)
    Paper-clipping simply refers to oscillating in and out of end-range or
peak tension. For example, say you’re mobilizing your anterior hip. To
get the best results, you want to drive your hip forward into extension
and then move in and out of end-range tension. You need to be active at
end-range by oscillating in and out of peak tension, not maintaining a
static position. It’s these small oscillations that really create the most
change, especially within the joint capsule. Think about how much
bending back and forth it takes to break a paper clip: When tissues are
matted-down and as tight as steel wires it takes a ton of movement to
get rid of that stiffness and free up the tissues.



                                   516
Oscillate in and out of end-range tension by driving your hip forward,
hanging out for a second or two, and then retreating back. The key is not
to bounce, but to slowly move in and out of peak tension.

Voodoo Flossing (Compression)
    Voodoo flossing is an intermittent, compression-based joint-
mobilization method that incorporates all the mobility systems
simultaneously. In my opinion, it’s the most powerful and effective
method in terms of restoring position and motion. (Note: A voodoo band
is a stretch-band engineered specifically for compression-based
mobilization techniques. You can find them at MobilityWOD.com.
Another option is to simply improvise by cutting a bicycle tire tube in
half.)
    To do it, wrap a band around the joint or restricted tissue—creating a
large compression force a few inches below and a few inches above the
affected area—move your limb around in every direction for about two
or three minutes, and then remove the band. What’s great about voodoo
flossing is that you can mobilize in the position you’re trying to alter.
Rolling out your quad will certainly improve your position, but you’re not
mobilizing within the context of functional full-range movement. For
example, if you voodoo-band your quads and then squat, you’re able to
change the mechanics in some of the tissues that may be restricting

                                   517
your squat. If you wrap your knee and then squat, you’re loading the joint
and encouraging improvement in every system while getting into your
position of restriction.




                                   518
Voodoo flossing allows you to mobilize in the position you’re trying to
change (i.e., the bottom of the squat).

    Here’s the deal: You can only hypothesize what you’re actually
changing because voodoo flossing works on so many different levels.
Wrapping a band around a joint or chunk of scar tissue and introducing
movement creates a global shearing effect—restoring sliding-surface
function to the underlying banded tissues—and the band bulk creates a
flexion-gapping force at the joint, which can help restore range-of-motion
to the joint. Not only that, but when you release the compression your
blood floods into poorly saturated joints and tissues. In short, voodoo
flossing will help restore sliding surfaces to matted-down tissue, resolve
joint pain, and radically improve muscle contraction. If you’re limited by
position or have knee or elbow pain (this is my first stop for treating
tennis elbow), get a band around the joint or restricted area and force the
tissue through a full range-of-motion.

                                   519
    Voodoo flossing also happens to be one of the best methods for
dealing with a swollen joint or swollen tissue. Swelling blows out a lot of
the proprioceptors, presses on nerve endings, causes acute pain, and
degrades joint mechanics. You should take swelling very seriously. By
compressing the joint, you push swelling back into the lymphatic system
where it can be drained from the body.
    It’s important to note that the technique for wrapping a joint or tissue
and the technique for addressing a swollen joint are slightly different. For
example, to flush out the swelling caused by a sprained ankle, start as
close to the tip of the foot as you can, wrapping with about a half inch
overlap (or half the band overlap), keeping about a 50 percent stretch in
the band all the way around the swollen limb. The key points are to wrap
a few inches below the swollen area, leaving no skin exposed, and keep
the tension even in the band. Once the foot is compressed, move it
around for a couple of minutes. Then take the band off for a few minutes
to give the tissue a chance to rebound and recover. Then wrap it again.
Repeat this process for about twenty minutes, or until you stop
experiencing change. It’s insanely effective. Using this technique, you
can literally restore an ankle the size of a grapefruit to normal size and
completely relieve the pain. In my opinion, this is the best remedy for
getting rid of inflammation and pain in injured joints.




                                    520
To voodoo wrap a swollen joint, start as far down on the limb as
possible, wrapping toward the heart, and create a 50 percent stretch in
the band around the swollen area. The goal is to cover the entire area,
keeping a half-inch overlap as you wrap.

      The general rule for compressing a swollen joint is to wrap toward
the heart. So if you’re wrapping an ankle, you start at the toes and wrap
up the leg. However, when you’re mobilizing a joint or matted-down
scar tissue, it doesn’t really matter if you wrap from high to low or low to
high—just start a few inches below or above the area in question.
Typically, I’ll put a 75 percent stretch or tension across the area I’m
working on and 50 percent around the remaining area. For example, if
I’m voodoo flossing the front of my knee around my suprapatellar pouch,
I’ll put 75 percent stretch over the front and 50 percent around the back.
As in wrapping a swollen joint, there should be a half inch (or half the
band) overlap. If you’ve got band left over when you’re done wrapping,
you can make an “X” over the targeted area for an additional shearing

                                    521
effect.




          522
To correctly wrap a joint or section of tissue, start a few inches below or
above the compromised area, keeping a half-inch overlap in the band.
Continue wrapping until you cover the area you are trying to change. If
you have extra band, form an “X” by wrapping across the entire area. On
your final loop, create extra stretch so that you can tuck the end piece
underneath the band. The tension will keep the band in place. Once
wrapped, move the limb through as much range-of-motion as possible.




                                   523
     Just so you know, voodoo flossing can be a bit uncomfortable. But
don’t worry; despite the level of discomfort, it’s not sketchy and does not
harm the joint or tissue in any fashion. If you end up with some red
marks on your skin, which we call leopard stripes, don’t panic—that’s
just the superficial skin layers being pulled on the surface. You’ll live.
     There are, however, some general guidelines to follow. For starters,
if you start to go numb or get a tingly sensation—pins and needles—or
your limb turns into a color that makes you think of zombies, take the
band off. Usually, that happens at about the two minute mark. In most
cases, you will get a tingly sensation before your hand or foot turns white
so if you hit this stage you need to act fast. Another warning sign is if you
suddenly feel very claustrophobic. You need to respect these sketchy
feelings and signs. As with most mobilizations, it’s pretty intense but you
should be able to differentiate between discomfort and feelings like
numbness, tingling, or claustrophobia. And you should be able to
recognize skin tone that resembles that of a dead person.




                                    524
When you touch the skin, it should turn white and then return to normal
—like touching sunburned skin. If you touch the skin and color doesn’t
return, it’s time to take the band off.




When you take the band off, your skin will turn the color of a dead
person. But within a few seconds, you’ll notice increased blood flow into

                                   525
the area.




            526
527
The band will pinch your skin, leaving red lines across your skin. Don’t
flip out. They will disappear after a few minutes.


Flexion Gapping
    Flexion gapping helps to remove joint capsule restriction and restore
flexion range-of-motion to the knee and elbow. You should be able kiss
your forearm to your biceps and get your calf flush with your hamstring
without effort. If you have to move your head toward your hand to feed
yourself or turn your feet out so you can drop into a deep squat, you’re
missing flexion range-of-motion at your secondary engines (knee and
elbow). An easy way to blow away the hinge dust and restore normal
range to the joint is to roll up a towel, jam it behind your knee or elbow,
and then create a compression or flexion force over the fulcrum. You
can also use a Rogue monster band or voodoo band to create a gapping
effect, as illustrated in the photo.




You can create a gapping force by rolling up a towel or by creating a
distraction with a band. Voodoo flossing will also create a gapping effect.


Upstream-Downstream Approach
   Identifying your position of restriction is the best way to address

                                   528
tissue dysfunction and solve mechanical problems as they relate to
movement: If you’re struggling to get your knees out in the bottom of a
squat, it makes sense to mobilize in that position of restriction.
     But what if you are in pain, or tweak your knee or back, or get hurt
playing sports?
     Even if you maintain good form and move with perfect technique,
pain and injury are an inherent reality, especially if you play and train at
a high level. Joints get tweaked and tissues get stiff. It’s the nature of
being a physically active human being. This is why it’s important to have
a template for not only solving mechanical problems, but also for
resolving and treating pain. The upstream-downstream approach serves
as this template. It’s a simple idea: Mobilize the tissue upstream
(above) and downstream (below) of the problem.
     What’s great about the upstream-downstream approach is that you
don’t need to know anything about movement or anatomy to take care of
yourself. Just target the muscle and tissue above and below the
restricted area. It’s that simple. And yes, you can certainly mobilize at
the site of localized pain. However, where the rats get in is not
necessarily where they chew. If you have tight calves and quads, for
example, those tissues will pull on your knee, restricting range-of-
motion and compromising mechanics. Remember, you are encased in
a web of fascia—a layer of connective tissue—that transmits movement
throughout your body. So if your calf, quad, or hamstring is tight, the
fascia surrounding the musculature will also be tight. And if the fascia is
tight, it will pull on your knee, compromising your ability to get into
stable positions. By mobilizing the tissues above and below the knee—
quad, suprapatellar pouch, hamstring, calf, shin—you feed slack to the
tensioned joint and restore normal function to the muscles (and fascia)
tugging on your knee.
     The only problem with the upstream-downstream approach is that
it’s predicated on a lagging indicator, meaning that you spent time
moving incorrectly before your body started transmitting the pain signal.

                                    529
Ideally, you want to identify and deal with restrictions before they
devolve into pain. The problem is that it’s easy to circumvent or
assimilate bad mechanics until the body starts hurting. So figure out
where you are restricted and then work on restoring/improving range-of-
motion there before it becomes a problem.


Programming For Mobility
    To reiterate, there are two ways to approach mobility. One is to
identify your restriction and mobilize within the context of the position
you’re trying to improve, and the other is to mobilize upstream and
downstream of a painful area.
    Now that you have a basic template, let’s discuss how to program
for mobility.
    To begin, it’s important to understand that there are no days off (see
Rules of Mobility, see here). You need to commit 15 to 20 minutes every
single day on mobilizing and working on your mechanics. If you can do
more, great, but fifteen to twenty minutes is the minimum requirement.
Modern humans are very busy. Yet we still need to carve out time to
work on position and improve tissue function. This is why I recommend
daily doses of at least 15 to 20 minutes of mobility work. Although this
may not seem like much, it accumulates over time. If you mobilize for
twenty minutes a day, it adds up to 140 minutes over a week, which is a
significant amount of time spent working on correcting tissues and
improving position.
    What should you do within that 15 or 20 minute timeframe? Here are
three general rules to help you devise an individualized mobility
program:

       1. Always resolve issues with painful joints and tissues first,
          and then focus on positions of restrictions. If you imagine a
          target, your pain or restricted area should be at the center of

                                   530
       that target every time you mobilize and comprise a good
       portion of your designated 15-20 minute block of time. Spend
       the rest of the time focusing on a position that you’re trying to
       improve (bottom of the squat), or undoing any damage you
       might have incurred from your workday, like being buckled
       into an office chair.
    2. Spend no less than 2 minutes in each position. Research
       unquestionably asserts that it takes at least 2 minutes to
       make soft tissue change. This means that 2 minutes is your
       minimum therapeutic dose per position. For example, if
       you’re doing the couch stretch you need to spend no less than
       two minutes mobilizing each side of your hip. However, my
       rule as a therapist is to work on a restricted area until there’s
       improvement or I realize that there’s no more to be had in the
       session. This could mean 2 minutes or 10 minutes. So don’t
       be in a rush to move on if you haven’t experienced
       improvement in the tissue.
    3. Choose three mobilization or target areas. Don’t get overly
       ambitious and try to mobilize ten different positions. Most
       people can handle only three mobilization or target areas per
       session.

Here’s what a sample program might look like:
Mobilize the Shoulder
       Shoulder capsule mobilization: 2 minutes for each arm.
       Overhead banded distraction: 2 minutes for each arm.

Mobilize Bottom of the Squat
      Single-leg flexion with external rotation bias: 2 minutes for
      each side.



                                531
   Undo Sitting
        Super-couch mobilization: 2 minutes for each side.

   Total time: 16 minutes.

    Remember, programming for mobility changes from day to day,
depending on your areas of restriction, the movements you are
performing, and the positions you’re hanging out in. The key is for you to
constantly work on your position and spend the necessary time doing
basic body maintenance.


Rules of Mobility
    To optimize your time and keep you safe, I’ve laid out six
fundamental guidelines for implementing the mobilization techniques.

            Test and Retest
    Everything you do should have observable, measurable, and
repeatable results. Otherwise, your time would be better spent watching
reality television. Think of testing and retesting as a diagnostic tool for
measuring improvement within the context of movement and/or pain.
    Here’s how it works. Say you’re trying to improve your squat. Before
you start smashing your quads or mobilizing your calves, get into the
bottom of the squat and assess your areas of restriction. Next, perform
some mobility therapeutics on the tissues that you think might be holding
you back from achieving optimal form. For example, if you think it’s
your tight calves, do some mobility on them and then retest the bottom of
your squat. Can you drive your knees out farther? Can you keep your
back flat? If you mobilized the right area and implemented the
appropriate techniques, you should experience or observe measurable
improvement. If you can’t see improvement, then you have irrefutable,

                                   532
the world-is-round evidence that there wasn’t any problem in that area,
which means you need to start targeting another area.




    Mobilizing should improve your ability to get into a good position,
optimize movement, and reduce or banish pain. Testing and retesting
lets you know if what you are doing is actually working. Also, using your
new range-of-motion right away in an actual movement helps your brain
keep track of these new ranges.

             If it Feels Sketchy, it’s Sketchy
      Mobilizing restricted tissue is uncomfortable—there’s no getting
around that fact. If you have ever subjected your quads to some
smashing on a roller, you know what I’m talking about. But unless your
entire quad is as stiff as wood, only certain sections will hurt. When you
hit a patch of restricted tissue, it’s agony, but as soon as you move past
it, the pain is over. That’s because supple tissue doesn’t elicit a pain
response under pressure.
      But there’s a difference between discomfort, even intense
discomfort, and harmful pain. If you think you’re injuring yourself, you

                                   533
probably are injuring yourself. If something feels like it’s tearing,
something probably is tearing. If you experience hot, burning pain, your
body is telling you that something is not right. If you’re getting a horrible
hip impingement, guess what? You have a horrible hip impingement.
Don’t keep mobilizing into the problem because it will only make the
problem worse.
    What am I trying to say? Ungluing stiff and restricted tissues can be
uncomfortable, but it shouldn’t feel like you’re causing more damage
than is already there. It’s up to you to know the difference and listen to
your body. Having a glass of wine can make mobilizing a little more
tolerable, but getting drunk and passing out on a lacrosse ball is never a
good idea. And if you roll around on that lacrosse ball for an hour (before
you pass out!), you’re going to bruise your precious tissues.
    I often say, “Don’t go into the pain cave.” People have an immense
capacity to hurt themselves, ignore pain, and travel to extreme places of
suffering. And that’s how they end up hurting themselves when
mobilizing. This is what I must say to you: Stand at the entrance of the
pain cave, but do not enter the pain cave. Mobility should be
uncomfortable but not unbearable.

            No Days Off
    It’s important to understand that there is no distinction between lifting
heavy in the gym and picking up a pillow from the ground. Both require
conscious awareness of positioning and how best to organize your body.
So no matter what you are doing throughout the day you should always
think about improving your position and movement mechanics, as well
as spend at least fifteen to twenty minutes performing basic body
maintenance. Likewise, you don’t want to take a day off from good
nutrition or miss a night of sleep. Of course, there will be times when
you can’t eat perfectly, exercise, or get eight hours of sleep. But you
should cultivate a habit of always being in a good position, regardless of
what you are doing.

                                    534
 Don’t Make a Pain Face
     We have a saying around our gym: Don’t make a pain face while
 mobilizing. We say this for several reasons. For one, it shortens your
 neck flexors, causing more restriction along the athletic chain.
     Secondly, you don’t want to associate pain with a weird face
 because those things get mapped together in the body. If you grimace
 every time you roll out your quads, what expression do you think
 you’ll make when your quads start burning during a workout? In a
 competitive environment, you don’t want to give away how much you
 are suffering. Your opponent will see that and use it to his advantage.
 This is why athletes practice relaxing their face when they’re
 uncomfortable. When you mobilize, you’re making a conscious
 choice to improve yourself, so you might as well embrace it.
     Lastly, pulling weird faces while you’re lying on a ball can be
 pretty creepy—you don’t want to freak people out.

    The fact is, if you want to play and train at a high level, you cannot
slack off for even one day. You have to constantly think about your
position, whether you are at work, playing a sport, lifting, or lounging
around. This is the basis of the “no days off” rule.
    Here’s a simple example to help illustrate my point. A DEA agent
buddy of mine told me about a friend who used to walk past his trunk
every time he got out of the car. It didn’t matter if he was on duty or off
duty, if he parked at a grocery store, at his house, or at a restaurant—he
would walk all the way around the car and past his trunk every single
time. He did this because he kept his rifle in his trunk and he wanted to
ingrain the pattern of approaching his trunk into his motor program. That
way, if he were ever in a dodgy firefight, he wouldn’t hesitate or think—
he would automatically find himself by his trunk, ready to grab his rifle.
    Remember, your body is an adaptation machine. If you spend a few

                                   535
minutes a day trying to improve position, you will improve your position.
But if you take a few days off, you will get stiff and your movement and
position will reflect that adaptation. Even if you’re taking a day off from
the gym, you should never take a day off good movement and position or
mobilizing. In fact, it’s the day after training when a lot of muscle
soreness and tissue stiffness aggregates, and those are the days when
you really need to make sure that you’re working on restoring normalcy
to those tissues. For this reason, it’s best to break up mobility into short
doses. This gives you plenty of time to effect change within the context of
movement, and more importantly, it is manageable over the long haul.

            Make Mobility Realistic
     As I said before, the average person isn’t going to know what you’re
talking about if you tell him that he needs to improve hip flexion and
external rotation. But if I tell him that he needs to mobilize the bottom of
the squat, he can immediately make the connection between the position
he needs to mobilize and the position he’s trying to change. This makes
it really easy to program and start thinking about how to approach
mobility. If you’re missing overhead range-of-motion, it makes sense to
mobilize in a position with your arms overhead and externally rotated.
     The key is to prioritize mobilizations that approximate real-life
situations. Instead of stretching your hamstrings while lying on your
back, for example, get a band around your hip and hinge from the hips
while standing up, which looks a lot like deadlifting. The more you can
replicate what you’re trying to change, the more you will improve your
position.

           Always Mobilize in a Good Position
   Committing an overextension spinal fault or mobilizing with your
shoulder in an unstable position is not going to get you the results you
are looking for. In fact, all you are doing is encouraging bad positions and

                                    536
ingraining bad mechanics. Keep the movement principles in mind as
you mobilize. If your ankles are collapsed, your knees cave inward, your
back rounds, or you overextend at your lumbar spine, reset and fix your
position.

             Don’t Get Stuck in One Position. Explore Your
             Business.
    Think of the mobilization techniques as a basic guide. Although I
demonstrate how to perform each mobilization with proper technique,
you are not limited to performing them exactly as the photos indicate.
You know where you are tight and restricted better than anybody else.
As long as you maintain good form and avoid defaulting into bad
positions, you should absolutely feel free to explore your dysfunction and
move into newly challenged areas. I call this “informed freestyle.” If
you’re mobilizing your anterior hip, for example, you might rotate your
body to the side or put your arm overhead. The key is to target areas that
feel the tightest.




                                   537
                 MOBILITY TOOLS

    To best replicate the techniques demonstrated in this chapter, there
are a few pieces of equipment that you will need. Understand that if you
don’t have the listed tools, improvise by using whatever you have laying
around the house: wine bottle, dog toys, sports equipment, the list goes
on and on. For example, if you don’t have a voodoo floss band, cut a
bicycle tube in half and you have yourself a functional compression-
band. However, everyone should have three lacrosse balls on hand: one
for acute smashing, and two for creating a double lacrosse ball (LAX ball
peanut).




                                  538
Double Lacrosse Ball (LAX Ball
Peanut)
    The single lacrosse ball can be used on pretty much every body
part—glutes, feet, hips, suprapetallar pouch, anterior shoulder, ribs,
shoulder blades, and other areas of the back (to mention a few)—but
not to mobilize the thoracic spine. To restore suppleness to your
thoracic spine, you need to block the facet joints—which are the
weight-bearing stabilizing structures located behind and between the
adjacent vertebrae—using two lacrosse balls. As you can see from
the photos, by taping two lacrosse balls together, you can create a
very low-tech and inexpensive mobility tool that can be used to
restore normal range to the thoracic spine.

                                  539
To begin, you need two lacrosse balls and some athletic tape. Next,
attach the two lacrosse balls by wrapping a few layers of tape around
the outside of the balls. Then wrap another couple of layers around the
center. It’s that easy.




                                 540
ANTERIOR VIEW




     541
AREA 1: Thoracic Spine (Upper Back, Neck, Scapula)
—see here


                   542
AREA 2: Posterior Shoulder (Lat, Posterior Deltoid)
—see here

AREA 3: Anterior Shoulder (Pec, Anterior Deltoid)
—see here

AREA 4: Downstream Arm (Triceps, Elbow, Forearm,
Wrist)—see here

AREA 5: Trunk (Psoas, Low Back, Oblique)—see
here

AREA 6: Posterior High Chain (Glutes, Hip Capsule)
—see here

AREA 7: Anterior High Chain (Hip Flexors,
Quadriceps)—see here




                   543
POSTERIOR VIEW




      544
AREA 8: Medial Chain (Adductor)—see here

                 545
AREA 9: Posterior Chain (Hamstring)—see here


AREA 10: Knee—see here


AREA 11: Medial and Anterior Shin—see here


AREA 12: Calf—see here


AREA 13: Ankle and Plantar Surface—see here




                  546
          AREA 1
      THORACIC SPINE
(UPPER BACK, NECK, SCAPULA)




            547
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Bottom of the ribcage to the base of the neck and top of the
          scapula

Most Commonly Used Tools:

                                   548
Roller
Double Lacrosse Ball
Single Lacrosse Ball
Barbell
Keg




                       549
Test and Retest Examples:
        Overhead Positioning
        Hanging from the Bar
        Back Squat Setup

                               550
          Front Rack Position
          Handstand Pushup
          Pushup and Bench Press

T-Spine Smash Extension
This is the most basic of all the thoracic-spine mobilization
techniques that we use. It is basic thoracic mobility 101.

    The t-spine (thoracic) smash is also what we call a “global
extension exercise.” This means you’re not trying to target any one
tissue or motion segment as you would when using the double lacrosse
ball. Instead, the goal is to open up the entire thoracic system. While a
ball is more precise in digging into a tight, nasty spot, the foam roller will
tackle two or three motion segments of your back, the rib facet joints,
and some soft tissues in the upper back.
     The key to this mobilization is to focus on creating large extension
forces over the roller by arching back. A common mistake is to
mindlessly roll back and forth with zero intention or purpose. This does
nothing. At gyms, you often see two people foam rolling aimlessly like
this—in the name of a warm-up—while they catch up on a new Game of
Thrones episode. This does nothing. To make real and lasting change,
you have to create as much of a teeter-totter effect and extension force
(arching back) over those tissues as possible. When you find a tight
area, use the roller as a fulcrum by arching your back. Think about
letting the roller break you into extension. You can take a big breath and
try to snake your way around, extend back and forth, elevate your hips to
add pressure and then lower your butt to the ground. Explore the area,
find where your back is tight, and stay on that area it until you’ve made
some change.


                                     551
Improves:
        Normal Posture
        Overhead Positioning
        Stable Shoulder Position
        Global Extension and Thoracic Extension




                               552
553
        1. To begin, wrap your arms around your chest and position the
           roller at the base of your ribcage. By wrapping your arms into
           a big hug, you suck up the slack in your back, pulling all the
           soft tissue and the scapula out of the way so that you can
           target the motion segments of your back.
        2. With the tissues of the upper back wound up tight, create an
           extension force over the roller by arching back. From this
           position, spend as much time as necessary extending over
           the roller until you feel change in the area.
        3. Keeping your arms wrapped tight around your body, sit up as
           if you were doing a crunch. As you sit up, keep the majority of
           your weight positioned over the roller, scoot your butt toward
           your feet, slide your back down the roller, and move on to a
           new area.
        4. Having positioned the roller in the middle of your upper back,
           arch back and extend over the roller, creating as much
           extension as possible.
        5. As soon as you experience enough change, progress up your
           spine to the base of your neck. To create additional extension
           over the roller, squeeze your butt and elevate your hips as
           you arch back.

T-Spine Smash: Side-to-Side
    Sometimes, simply arching over a roller isn’t enough to challenge
what’s most resistant in your signature brand of “tightness.” If you
stumble across a stiff area that is not responding to the large extension
forces, try rolling from side to side across the tissue. This side-to-side
smashing allows you to seesaw through some of the soft tissues
adjacent to the spine that can limit extension and rotation. If you play golf,


                                     554
tennis, baseball, or engage in any activity that requires you to twist, lock
the side-to-side smash into your routine.




                                    555
556
        1. Wind up the tissues of your upper back by wrapping your
           arms around your body, and position the roller at the base of
           your rib cage.
        2. After hunting out a stiff area roll back and forth, making sure
           to keep your upper back tight. You can twist from your hips or
           rotate with your entire body. There is no wrong way.
        3. Roll across the roller onto your left side. Seesaw back and
           forth like this until you experience enough change. If you
           notice that one side is tighter than the other, choose to remain
           on that side and implement the side roll smash as
           demonstrated in the next technique.


T-Spine Smash: Side Roll
     If you notice one side of your spine is tighter than the other, consider
this an alarm that requires urgent response. The stiffer side of your back
will impair your ability to rotate on that side. Failure to attack the issue
will trigger problems upstream and downstream of the area.
     If, for example, you notice the left side of your upper back is tighter
than the other, turning onto your side and smashing that area is one way
to address the issue. Don’t overthink the situation by trying to diagnose
the root cause. Just know that the left side should feel like the right side.
It’s that simple.




                                    557
       1. If you notice that the left side of your upper back is stiffer than
          the right, roll onto that side and start slowly rolling up and
          down the tight area.
       2. Roll up and down the side of your back, pressure waving into
          the tight area. Remember, you’re not limited to just rolling up
          and down. You can pressure wave into the stiffness (which is
          particularly effective with a rumble roller or double lacrosse
          ball), or side bend over the area.


T-Spine Smash: Double Lacrosse Ball Variation
    Work on the upper back with a roller and you’re working the thoracic
system in a global way. Working on the upper back with a double
lacrosse ball, on the other hand, allows you to localize the target and
zero in on one segment at a time. This makes for a more acute thoracic
mobilization. What you’ll find is that there are usually one or two
segments of the vertebra that are responsible for restrictions riddling
through the entire back.
    There are multiple variations of this technique, as there are with the
roller. You can arch your back, elevate your hips and lower them to the
ground while arching back, rotate from side to side, raise your arms
overhead, or use some combination of all of these. As with all the
techniques that I demonstrate, you’re not limited to what’s shown in the
photos.

Improves:
          Normal Posture
          Overhead Positioning

Method:

                                    558
Joint Mechanics




1. Hug your arms around your body to take up slack and move
   your scapula out of the way. Make sure to nestle the points
   of the ball in between each vertebral section.
2. After creating tension in your upper back, slowly extend over
   the lacrosse balls. Because the double lacrosse ball is a
   more acute fulcrum, you have to keep the base of your
   ribcage anchored to your pelvis. To avoid overextending
   your lumbar spine, keep your core engaged.
3. As you arch back, drive your heels into the mat and elevate
   your hips. To effect change, you can roll from side to side,
   rotate from your shoulders, and snake around.
4. Still in extension, slowly lower your butt to the mat.



                         559
T-Spine Plate Smash
    A hard-training athlete is stiff in a more layered and labyrinthine way
than your average Joe. So if you’re a big strong guy or girl, you probably
need to add weight to the double lacrosse ball smash to spur some
change. The best way to accomplish this is to position a plate, ideally a
45-pound bumper plate, over your chest and wrap your arms around the
outside of the weight. By adding some pressure to your chest, you get
the ribs involved, which play a role in t-spine and overhead shoulder
mobility. This also forces more downward pressure into the ball,
allowing for a more acute and aggressive thoracic mobilization.

Improves:
         Acute T-Spine Stiffness in Athletes




                                   560
T-Spine Smash: Overhead Extension Bias
    Although wrapping your arms around your body is a very effective
way to improve thoracic mobility, it’s specific to your upper back. By
reaching your arms overhead, you tie in the shoulder and improve the
relationship between shoulder flexion, thoracic extension, and rotation.

                                   561
To help you better understand this, think of a pitcher’s fastball, a tennis
player’s serve, or a volleyball spike. All of these actions require
overhead position, thoracic spine extension, and upper body rotation.
    Your upper back contains an intricate network of systems that all
relate, react, and communicate with each other. Garbled systems in the
back can make it difficult to stabilize your shoulders or lift your arms
overhead. Hence, if you’re trying to improve your overhead position, you
need to mobilize around the shape you’re trying to change. The t-spine
smash with overhead extension bias is a perfect example of this
concept.
    As a side note, although you can set up for the overhead extension
variation from scratch, you don’t have to do this mobilization
independent of the previous techniques. In other words, you can go from
the hug position to arms overhead, back to the hug, back into overhead
extension. Just make sure your shoulders are in a stable position and
you keep your midline engaged. Be careful that you don’t bend your
elbows or hinge at the bottom of the thoracic spine. (That’s probably the
most common error.) Bending your elbows puts your shoulders in an
unstable position, while hinging at the bottom of the thoracic spine
causes overextension at your lower back. To avoid these faults, you
have to fight against the hinge at the junction of your thoracic and lumbar
spine by keeping your abs tight and lockout your elbows overhead while
actively positioning your armpits forward.

Improves:
         Overhead Positioning
         Thoracic Extension
         Rotation
         Throwing Mechanics



                                   562
1. Position the base of your ribcage against the roller. While
   executing this mobilization it’s important to remember that
   raising your arms overhead creates an additional extension
   force, which can cause you to overextend at the lumbar spine.
   To avoid this fault, use the two-hand rule to remind yourself to
   maintain a tight, neutral, and engaged midline.
2. Raise your arms overhead. If you look at the photo, you’ll
   notice that my elbows are locked out, my armpits are


                           563
          forward, and I’m actively reaching toward the ceiling.
       3. Keeping your midline engaged and your shoulders in a stable
          position, arch over the roller.


T-Spine Smash: Lacrosse Ball Extension Bias
Variation
   This is the same idea in that you’re tying in some end-range
shoulder flexion with thoracic extension. Instead of mobilizing around
multiple motion segments, however, you isolate individual vertebra
segments.




                                  564
Position the double lacrosse ball into a specific motion segment of your
spine and raise your arms overhead. Keep your midline engaged, your
elbows locked out, and your armpits facing forward.




Still reaching your arms overhead, extend over the lacrosse ball. From
here, you can roll from side to side or elevate your hips to create
additional pressure.


T-Spine Smash: Barbell Variation




                                  565
     With the Movement and Mobility System, you’re not limited to any
one tool. I highly encourage use of everyday items to make good things
happen. Enter the barbell. Almost every gym has one lying on the floor
so if you don’t have access to a double lacrosse ball or pipe, you can use
all the variations already demonstrated on the bar. I never want to hear
the excuse, “I don’t have a lacrosse ball or pipe to roll on so I can’t do it.”
Use your imagination and make use of what’s in reach: a dog toy, a
rolling pin, whatever. It’s all fair game.


T-Spine Smash: Overhead Extension Bias

                                     566
    If you glance over at the photos, you’ll notice that I anchor my hands
to a barbell. This can just as easily be the frame of a couch, by the way.
Then I lower my hips toward the ground to emphasize extension. Notice
I’m using my lower body to create an extension force by bracing my
shoulders into a fixed position.
    Many people—when they’re lying over a roller or lacrosse ball—
can’t move their arms into a good overhead position and press their
hands on the ground due to a lack of mobility. This is why I recommend
anchoring your hands to the ground. It facilitates better reach and
increases the impact of the exercise.
    Let’s explore an important concept here. Imagine two exercises that
are similar in shape but have a different effect on the system—like the
handstand pushup versus the strict-press. Both require a good overhead
position, yet each exaggerates a different movement. One begins in the
overhead position while the other movement finishes in the overhead
position. On paper they appear very similar—but you wouldn’t restrict
yourself to only one exercise, right? Of course not! All self-respecting
athletes and coaches understand the importance of balancing exercises
as a means of maximizing performance and health. It’s intuitive.
However—and here’s the message I want you to embrace—when it
comes to mobility people tend to get stuck in one dimension.
    The point is you have to address both ends of the spectrum in your
mobility work. If your goal is to simply improve thoracic extension and
bias some arm flexion in the process, the previously demonstrated
exercises are great. But if you really want to create change across the
entire system, you have to approach your mobilization from both ends—
just like you stimulate a multi-dimensional training effect by using both
the strict-press and the handstand pushup. For optimal results, you have
to balance it out.




                                   567
1. To begin, wrap your arms around your body and take up all
   the slack in your upper back. Once that’s accomplished,
   extend over the roller with your ribcage in line with your
   pelvis by elevating your hips. Don’t arch back into extension.
2. With your hips elevated, anchor your hands to the bar,
   keeping your elbows locked out and your armpits forward,
   and then slowly lower your hips toward the ground. The
   closer you can get your hands together, the better. It’s
   important to notice how this variation allows me to prioritize
   my overhead positioning and then exaggerate extension with
   my lower body.
3. Continue to lower your hips toward the ground.
4. As your butt touches down, straighten your legs, anchoring
   your hips to the ground. From here, you can hang out until you
   experience some change, or move on to another area. The
   key is to maintain a good overhead position, keep your
   midline engaged, and elevate and lower your hips over the
   fulcrum or hang out in a globally extended position until you
   effect some change.


                           568
T-Spine Smash: Overhead with Extension Bias
(Lacrosse Ball Variation)
    This is the exactly the same as the t-spine smash overhead with
extension bias, but I’m showing it with a double lacrosse ball instead of a
roller to better attack specific spots. To get the best result from this
mobilization, position the double lacrosse ball in your upper back around
the base of your neck.




        1. Position the lacrosse balls near the base of your neck, elevate
           your hips off the ground, and anchor your hands to the barbell
           with your elbows locked out and your armpits forward.
        2. Keeping your midline engaged to avoid overextending your
           lumbar spine, slowly lower your hips to the mat.


T-Spine Keg: Global Extension
    Most members of the Supple Legion have a keg lying around the
house or gym, which I can appreciate because it serves multiple
purposes. You can fill it up with the obvious, or use it as a tool to
improve performance: an indisputable double win. For the purposes of
this section, you can use it to create a very large global extension of the
spine, which is good for two reasons.
    First, it allows you to explore global positions that tie in all the motion

                                     569
segments of your vertebra. For example, if you’re arching over a foam
roller or pipe, you’re in global extension, but you’re probably only getting
two or three motion segments of the spine. When you extend over a keg
you’re able to explore the relationship of all the motion segments and
create a global impact on the spine. A lot of people try to exaggerate this
motion in the form of a bridge, which is characterized with sloppy
shoulder, back, and hip extension. The keg allows you to focus on the
extension without having to strain yourself to maintain a good position.
    The second benefit of using a keg is that it opens up the playing field.
Often when you’re extending over a roller or lacrosse balls, the ground
restricts your reach. When you’re on a keg or large round surface—like
a medicine ball stacked on top of a couple plates—you can get a much
larger arch in the tissues you’re trying to change.




                                    570
571
       1. Position your back over the keg. Keep your ribcage in line
          with your pelvis, your midline engaged, and your shoulders in
          a good position.
       2. Reach your arms overhead. (Notice that I place my hands
          close together, lockout my elbows, and position my armpits
          forward.)
       3. Keeping your shoulders in a stable position with your hands
          reaching overhead, elevate your hips and extend over the keg.


T-Spine Keg: Overhead Anchor with Extension
Bias—Option 1
    It’s important to remember that you can treat the keg just like the
foam roller and implement all the same variations previously
demonstrated. So in this sequence, I demonstrate the opposite version of
the last technique, which is accomplished by gripping a kettlebell to
anchor my hands to the ground and then lowering my hips. Again,
because you’re a little higher up and not restricted by the ground, you
can get a lot more global extension through the spine and shoulders.




                                  572
T-Spine Keg: Overhead Anchor with Extension
Bias—Option 2
     This is the same idea as option 1 but you’re adding a little bit of a
distraction to the shoulder joint. Although this is a more advanced
variation and takes some tinkering to get into the right position, it works
wonders. As with all the techniques that require large global extension
forces, you have to remain engaged and active. I was working with the
Navy, and one of the head instructors (let’s call him my big brother) said
it best. Pointing to a group of Navy ninjas hanging from a bar with their
midline disengaged, he said, “Look at those guys just hanging on their
meat.” I really think that statement paints a perfect picture of what you
don’t want to do. You never want to hang on your meat. Respect
yourself.



                                   573
Overhead Rib Mobilization
     In addition to restoring motion through your vertebrae, you also want
to be sure that your ribs are mobile and supple.
     What people forget is your ribs attach on your spine and can have a
profound effect on the joint mechanics of the system. So if you have a
stiff rib, it not only blocks key motion segments of your thoracic spine, it
restricts the resting relationship of your scapula, which dampens the
ability to stabilize your shoulders. Here are some very simple
mobilizations that can be used to restore suppleness to your ribs.
     In the sequence on the next page, I demonstrate one of the most
basic and effective techniques for fixing stiff ribs. As you can see from
the photos, the mobilization target area is from the second rib up. It
extends from the median trap (photo 1) and tracks down the areas
bordering the scapula (photo 2). The general prescription is to spend at
least thirty seconds or more on each rib and accumulate fifteen to twenty
slow arm swings.

                                    574
    As a rule, you always want to spend your time mobilizing the areas
that are stiff and restricting movement. However, sometimes you just
don’t have time to address all of your issues before a workout—like
maybe your entire back is a matted-down mess but you only have one
minute to warm-up and improve your position for the upcoming workout.
In such a situation, it helps to know where you need to spend your time
and energy so that you can have the biggest impact on the movement
you’re going to perform. Naturally, it would be great if you could deal
with all of your issues, but you only have so much time to fix yourself.
That’s why you have to break it up into calculated chunks. Here’s what I
suggest:
    If you’re going to do anything overhead, focus your attention on the
upper ribs. If you’re doing anything that requires extension or internal
rotation like the dip, bench press, or pushup, focus your attention on the
lower ribs. The reasons are simple. If you have a shoulder impingement
that is preventing you from getting your arm into a stable overhead
position, chances are good that you’re scapula is locked in place,
blocking the path of your moving arm. Although all the ribs that border
the scapula are implicated, the upper ribs tend to impede upward
elevation to a higher degree. In such a situation, starting in the median
trap and working your way down is probably your best bet. Conversely,
if you’re doing a workout that requires a lot of extension and internal
rotation of the shoulder, you may want to start lower on the ribcage
because stiff lower ribs can act like a strut that limits good scapular
positioning.


 Organizing the Scapula
     A lot of coaches, athletes, and physical therapists seem to think
 that an impingement of the shoulder automatically means a rotator
 cuff issue. Here’s what’s really happening: When your scapula is in a


                                   575
disorganized position, it turns your rotator cuff off. So if someone tells
you that your rotator cuff isn’t working correctly, that’s an indication
that you probably need to restore the scapula position so that your
rotator turns back on.
    If you start at the top of the scapula, place the ball between your
shoulder blade and spine. Now bridge your butt up as high as
possible, driving the ball deep into your soul, and reach your arm
overhead. Keep your elbow locked out. Now draw your arm across
your body and try to touch your opposite hip. Those rhomboids, traps,
and para-spinals get really tight. Bringing your arm across your body
is a great way to unglue them. As you work your way down the border
of your scapula, you can continue to swing your arm overhead as
described and illustrated in the photos. If you’re trying for bias
extension and internal rotation, on the other hand, the next technique
will have a more beneficial impact on the tissues you’re trying to
change.




                                   576
1. Position the lacrosse ball in the area bordering your scapula,
   between your right shoulder blade and spine.
2. To create additional pressure, drive your heels into the mat

                           577
           and elevate your hips. As you do this, reach your hand toward
           the ceiling, lockout your elbow, and pull your arm overhead.
           Remember, you want to keep your shoulder in a stable
           position so don’t bend your elbow or internally rotate your
           arm as you go overhead. If you default into a bent arm,
           internally rotated position, stop. That’s your end-range.
           Bending your elbow is a pathognomonic cue that you’re
           missing internal rotation of the shoulder.
       3. Keeping your elbow locked out, push your arm up overhead.
       4. With your hips still elevated, bring your right arm across your
          body and try to touch your opposite hip. By bringing your hand
          across your body with a straight arm, you take up the soft
          tissue slack and bias further excursion (more movement) of
          your shoulder blade. The idea is to have that shoulder come
          as far off your scapula as possible so you can to get
          maximum range in the tissues.


T-Spine Smash: Internal Rotation
      Stiff lower ribs have a profound impact on your ability to stabilize
your scapula in moments of extension and internal rotation. Think about
it like this: If your lower ribs are stiff, that means the tissues between
your lower rhomboids are trapped and the tissues between your scapula
and spine are not relating well with each other. The result: You
experience a diminished capacity to maintain a stable shoulder when
you’re doing anything that requires extension and internal rotation of the
shoulder. For example, if you’re bench pressing, dipping, or Olympic
lifting (I am referring specifically to the high-hang position) with stiff
lower ribs, you’ll find it extremely difficult to maintain control of your
scapula. Once you lose scapular control, you automatically default into

                                   578
an internally rotated, shoulders-rolled-forward position. You lose power,
bleed torque, and increase susceptibility to injury. Not good! To ensure
you can maintain control of that scapula to stabilize your shoulders
through movement, you have to restore suppleness to those stiff ribs and
tissues, which is exactly what this mobilization aims to fix.




Position the lacrosse ball in your lower ribs between the base of your
scapula and spine. Notice that I’m basing out on my left hand and
rotating my hips toward my right side.




                                   579
Keeping the ball in place, slide your left hand underneath your lower
back and drop your left hip to the mat.




With your arm pinned behind your back, rotate toward your right side,
focusing on driving the ball into the border of your scapula.




                                   580
Rotate toward your left side. From here, you can hunt around for tight
corners by moving your body up and down, driving the lacrosse ball into
the border of your depressed scapula. Really work on restoring sliding
surfaces to the stiff tissues surrounding the ribs.


First Rib Mobilization
    Let’s say you’re someone who works at a computer all day with poor
posture. Or maybe you’ve been doing some overhead movement with
screwy positions. What can happen is your shoulder and surrounding
tissues will shorten, causing your first rib to stiffen.
    The first rib functions like a pump handle. To go overhead, you need
that first rib to glide down as you elevate your arm. If that first rib is stiff,
an impingement is created that undermines shoulder stability, making
you look like a zombie when you reach upward.
    To address this issue, you first have to locate the first rib, which is
the bony structure between your collarbone and the base of your trap and
neck. Do this by sliding your hand down the base of your neck and
pressing straight down into your trap (see photo 1). If you do this, you’ll
always hit the first rib. Once you’ve located the target area, pin a PVC
pipe or dowel against the wall, lie on the ground, and position an end of
the pipe into the first rib. The goal is to create a depression on the first
rib by driving your body upward into the pipe. Once you’ve
accomplished that, work to restore suppleness by moving your arm
overhead, oscillating your arm back and forth, or by taking in a big
breath and driving your body into the pipe. The key is to not just hang out
and suffer, but to get as much motion at the first rib as possible.
    If you’re a tactical athlete who has to pack around 50 to 100 pounds of
gear, put a gold star next to this mobilization and place it near the center
of your mobility target. Think: The weight of your pack is bearing down
on your neck and shoulder, pressing into the first rib. In addition to

                                      581
getting brutally tight, the motion segment gets jammed into the nerves
coming out of your neck. No wonder your hands are numb and you can
barely raise your arm overhead. By attacking the first rib, you can
restore normal function to the scapula.




                                  582
583
Jam a wooden dowel (you can probably find one of these in your closet)
into a corner and position it on your first rib. To create a depression on
the area and tack-down your first rib, take a big breath in, drive your
heels into the ground, and slide your body toward the wall above you.
Alternately, you can also use a PVC pipe with a towel wrapped around
the end.




                                   584
Keeping the dowel pinned in place, straighten your arm over your head.
If you run into a barrier as you raise your arm, oscillate back and forth
and try to get as much excursion through the tissues as possible.




With your elbow locked out, reach your arm straight overhead. From
here, you can continue to lower and raise your arm, you can work to
elevate your shoulder, or bring your arm underneath your body, as

                                   585
illustrated in photo 4.




To hit some additional corners, position your hand underneath your body
while continuing to scoot toward the wall.




                                 586
        AREA 2
  POSTERIOR SHOULDER
(LAT, POSTERIOR DELTOID)




           587
Mobilization Target Areas:
          The back of the shoulder, border of the scapula, insertion of
          the lat

Most Commonly Used Tools:

                                   588
Single Lacrosse Ball
Rogue Monster Band
Roller




                       589
Test and Retest Examples:
        Overhead Press
        Hanging from the Bar
        Back Squat Setup

                               590
Front Rack Position
Pushup and Bench Press




                     591
Shoulder Rotator Smash and Floss
    If you’ve tuned into Mobilitywod.com or attended one of my
seminars, you’ve inevitably heard me refer to the forward-rolled
shoulder as the dreaded douche bag shoulder position. Why? Have you
ever seen “that guy” walking around with his shoulders forward and his
chest puffed out in an attempt to look jacked and tough? Of course you
have. And I’d be willing to bet that the first thing that ran through your
mind was probably something along the lines of: “Damn that guy looks
like a giant douche bag.” Hence, douche bag shoulders.
    It’s important to mention that if your shoulders are rolled forward
because you sit at a desk all day with bad posture, or you’re a cyclist
who is constantly stuck in a rounded position, it doesn’t mean you’re a
douche bag, it just means you have douche bag shoulders. The problem
with douche bag shoulder syndrome is that a forward-rolled shoulder is
an unstable position that limits your capacity to create external rotation
torque, which, as you know, is a mechanism for dysfunctional
movement patterns, force dumps, torque bleeds, etc. Not only that, when
you hang out in an internally rotated position, the external rotators of the
shoulder get overstretched, brittle, and extremely stiff, which can lead to
acute shoulder pain.
    Fortunately, restoring suppleness to the area and relieving pain is
very simple. All you need is a hard ball, ideally a lacrosse ball, and you
can effectively unglue these tissues that are compromising your
mechanics, causing you pain, and making you look douchey.
    What you have to remember is the human body has a lot of big
muscles that have an internal rotational effect. Very few have an external
rotation effect. You cannot afford to put those external rotators into a
position where they become ineffective. Put another way, if you’ve
rendered your external rotators impotent by your douche bag shoulder
position, you’re going to have shoulder pain and probably injure the
rotator cuff. This is why when someone comes up to me and says, “I

                                    592
have shoulder pain,” I’ll immediately ask them if they’ve smashed the
back of their rotators yet. If the answer is No, I tell them, “Go and hit this
mobilization and tell me how you feel.” In most cases, just a few
minutes of smashing will relieve shoulder pain and reduce the douche-
ness of your shoulder position. It makes a gigantic difference.

Improves:
           Internal and External Rotation
           Torque Capacity
           Douche Bag Shoulder Syndrome

Methods:
           Smash and Floss
           Contract and Relax




                                     593
Position a lacrosse ball right above the insertion of your lat near your
armpit. This is where the external rotators insert behind your shoulder.
It’s important to note that there’s no right or wrong way. The goal is to
get some pressure on the ball so if you want something a little bit more
aggressive, roll onto your side to get some additional weight over your
shoulder.




                                   594
With the tissue behind your shoulder tacked-down, rotate your hand
toward the ground.




                                 595
Internally rotate your arm until you reach your end-range. From here,
you can continue to move you hand back and forth.


Shoulder Capsule Mobilization
     One of the issues of being a modern human is that we end up living
in the front of the shoulder capsule. If you’re someone who spends any
amount of time driving, working in front of the computer, or doing

                                  596
anything that the typical modern human does, chances are good that
your shoulders have been resting in the front of your capsule to such an
extent that your posterior shoulder capsule gets extremely tight. This not
only makes it difficult to pull your shoulders to the back of the socket, but
also causes you to lose the capacity to generate effective rotation of the
shoulder. To fix this issue, you have to set the shoulder to the back of the
socket so that you can effectively mobilize the posterior capsule.
    It’s important to note that people have been trying to solve this issue
of posterior stiffness for some time. The classic shoulder stretch where
you pull your arm across your body is something that you always see
athletes do, almost instinctually, as a way to mobilize their posterior
shoulder capsule (photo 1). What they’re really doing is just causing an
impingement in their shoulder, which leads to more problems. Do you
really think that rolling your shoulder forward into a crappy position and
then pulling it across your body is going to help you? Of course not!
Mobilizing in a compensated position is never okay. If you want to make
change in the posterior capsule, you have to set your shoulder in a good
position first, and then pull across (photo 2).
    The problem is this: If you’ve been hanging out in the front of your
capsule, or you strained or tweaked your shoulder, there’s a good
chance that your posterior capsule is tight. In such a situation, setting
your shoulder to the back of the socket, which is the stable position of the
joint, is difficult. This is where the shoulder capsule mobilization comes
into play. By using a heavy kettlebell, you can effectively drive that
shoulder to the back of the socket and then bias or encourage the tissues
into external rotation. This resets the shoulder into a good position,
stretches the posterior capsule, and accounts for the passive accessory
motion of the joint. In addition, the act of externally rotating gives you
some neuromuscular cuing (think breaking the bar), which transfers
over to many of the midrange pressing skills (bench press, pushup).

Improves:

                                    597
Shoulder Position
Recovery After a Shoulder Tweak
Midrange Pressing Mechanics




                      598
599
600
1. Position the kettlebell next to your right shoulder and latch on
   to the handle with your knuckles facing the ground. Notice that
   I’m gripping the top of the handle with my left hand.
2. Roll onto your back and pull the kettlebell over your right
   shoulder while simultaneously pressing it into extension.
3. To set your shoulder to the back of your socket, elevate your
   hips, move your shoulder blades out of the way, and pull your
   right shoulder to the mat. This is very similar, if the not the
   same setup, that you would do for a bench press or floor
   press.
4. Keeping your midline engaged and your shoulder positioned
   to the back of your socket, lower your hips to the ground. Note
   there should be no space between your shoulder and the mat.
   To keep your elbow locked out and your arm straight, reach
   your left arm across your chest and cup the back of your
   elbow.
5. With your shoulder pulled to the back of your capsule,
   externally rotate your hand. Continue to internally and
   externally rotate your arm to restore normal function to your
   shoulder.




                           601
    If your posterior capsule is extremely tight, it can be difficult to
fully reset your shoulder into a good position using the classic
mobilization. In such a situation, add a lateral distraction to open up
the tissues so that you can let your shoulder sink into the back of the
capsule.



Super-D Shoulder Capsule Mob

                                   602
    This is a variation that I stole from Donnie Thompson, the world’s
mightiest powerlifter. It emphasizes setting your shoulder to the back of
the socket, like the other techniques in this section. But what’s great
about Donnie’s piece is the simplicity. Manipulating a heavy kettlebell
into the press position can be sketchy if you don’t know what you’re
doing. With Donnie’s variation, you can safely and effectively handle
much larger forces without lifting any weight. This is particularly useful
if you’re really tight or you’re a big strong guy like Donnie who needs
several hundred pounds of tension to get the shoulder to drop into the
right position.




        1. Punch the Rogue monster band out and create tension by
           walking forward.
        2. After you’ve created a monster amount of stretch in the band,
           reach across your body and cup your left hand over the back
           of your right elbow. This prevents your arm from bending.
           Then, let the tension pull your shoulder into the back of your
           socket. Note this may take some time. Your instincts tell you
           to fight against the band, but you have to get your shoulder
           blade out of the way and let your arm sink back.


                                   603
        3. With your shoulder pinned in the back of your socket, rotate
           your body 90-degrees in a counterclockwise direction,
           wrapping the band around your body. This adds additional
           pressure and locks your shoulder into a good position.
        4. From here, add rotation by externally and internally rotating
           your hand. Remember, you want to keep your arm straight
           and your shoulder back. Don’t fight against the band. Just let it
           pull your shoulder into the right position and then add some
           rotation.


Overhead Tissue Smash—Option 1
    Whenever possible, you want to mobilize in a position that looks
similar in shape to the movement or position you’re trying to change.
For example, if you’re trying to improve your overhead position, it
makes sense to put your arm overhead and mobilize anything that might
be limiting your range. In most cases, what you’ll find is that the
underarm region, which is where the lat and rotator cuff insert into the
armpit, is really stiff and grotty. The approach is simple. If you can’t get
your arm overhead, or you’re having overhead pain, just ask yourself:
What are the tissues that are limiting that overhead position? Put your
arm overhead, lie on a ball, and start hunting for tight corners. Chances
are, you’ll find something that is really stiff and painful.

Improves:

           Overhead Positioning
           Shoulder Pain

Methods:


                                    604
Contract and Relax
Pressure Wave
Smash and Floss




                     605
        1. Position the lacrosse ball in your armpit near the insertion of
           your lat and rotator cuff.
        2. Roll slowly onto your right side, smashing the underlying
           tissues.
        3. Pressure more weight into the ball and slowly oscillate
           around the armpit area.


Overhead Tissue Smash—Option 2
    Another way to bias the overhead tissue smash is to pin a lacrosse
ball or softball against a wall. The target area is the same, but executing

                                    606
the mobilization from the standing position allows you to get deeper into
the tight tissues of the lat. In addition, standing gives you a little more
range to flex the arm, which not only takes up soft tissue slack, but also
allows for a different flossing stimulus.




                                    607
1. Straighten your arm overhead, place the ball on an area of
   stiff lat tissue using your opposite hand, and pressure your
   weight into the ball to pin it in place.
2. From here, you can pressure wave from side to side,
   contract and relax, and smash and floss by bending your arm.




                           608
Overhead Tissue Smash—Option 3
    There are two main templates when it comes to dealing with sliding
surface dysfunction. One is to go after it with a ball, which is the
equivalent of having someone drive a thumb, knuckle, or elbow into the
tissue. The second is to implement a roller, pipe, or larger object,
something comparable to a palm or fist. The former is more of a trigger
point approach that targets specific tissues, and the latter is a broad
compression surface that ties in larger sections. Both are useful, but
they have a different impact on the tissue you’re trying to mobilize. In
this sequence, I attack the overhead position with a roller for a global
smash effect.




Position the roller on your lat. To mobilize the tissue, slowly slide your
body down the roller until you encounter a tight spot. From there, you
can contract and relax, roll from side to side, and flex your arm
overhead.




                                    609
Banded Overhead Distraction
     If you’ve ruled out motor-control as a limiting factor in going
overhead, you automatically know that you have a mobility obstacle
working against you. The template for improving the overhead position
is a no-brainer: Simply mobilize the tissues you’re trying to change
while practicing the movement. Although this is an easy enough concept
to grasp, people still seem to get it wrong. If you ask someone who is
missing overhead range how much time they’ve spent mobilizing
overhead, they can usually only count the seconds, not the minutes, that
they’ve accumulated in that position.
     An example:
     Athlete: “Coach! I’m having trouble in the bottom of the squat.”
     Me: “Did you mobilize in the bottom position?”
     Athlete: “Sure, I did some air squats. That counts, right?”
     Me: “Your butt only touched the bottom position for .1 seconds for
every squat. So no, that doesn’t count. Maybe try this: Drop into the
bottom position and actually spend some real time mobilizing in the
position that is giving you trouble.”
     Although this would seem obvious, it’s not intuitive to people. When I
see someone who is missing overhead range, this is one of the first
mobilizations I prescribe because it forces him or her to spend a great
deal time under tension while working at end-range.
     To correctly perform this mobilization, make sure you create
external rotation torque by turning your palm up prior to loading up the
shoulder. You can do this by either grabbing your thumb and forcing your
palm up, or having a Superfriend do a jiu-jitsu wristlock on you, putting
your wrist into an externally rotated position. Far too many people just
grab the band and distract their arm overhead. This does not account for
full range-of-motion! You’re just hanging on your meat. Remember, full-
range is not putting your arm overhead. That’s still an unstable position.
Full range-of-motion means you can put your arm overhead to its end-

                                   610
range with rotational capacity.

Improves:

           Overhead Positioning
           External Rotational Capacity

Methods:
           Contract and Relax




        1. Hook your wrist through the band and grab both ends. Don’t
           make the mistake of latching on to the end of the band!
        2. Use your opposite hand to bias your right arm into external
           rotation so that your palm is facing up and your thumb is
           pointing toward the outside of your body.
        3. Keep your arm locked in an externally rotated position.
           Create tension by sinking your hips back and lowering your

                                   611
            torso toward the ground. With your arm externally rotated in
            the overhead position, contract and relax and try to distract
            the shoulder into new end-ranges.
        4. After spending some time in the first position, start hunting
           around for some stiff areas. For example, I start by throwing
           my right leg behind me, which lengthens that fascial line,
           increasing the aggressiveness of the stretch. The key is to
           keep your right palm up and your thumb out as you explore.


Overhead with External Rotation Bias
    This mobilization is a companion piece to the Banded Overhead
Distraction. As you can see from the photos, your elbow is fixed and
being held with the band, allowing you to plumb a deeper range of
shoulder flexion as compared to the banded overhead distraction. Put
simply, you change the dynamics of the shoulder by changing the
position. It’s like one of them is a barbell push-press and the other is a
handstand pushup. They’re very similar, but give you a very different
stimulus.

Improves:
           Overhead Positioning
           External Rotation Torque of the Shoulder

Methods:
           Contract/Relax




                                    612
1. Punch your arm through the band and hook the strap around
   your elbow.
2. With the band distracting your arm, latch on to the outside of
   the band using your right hand. The key here is to keep your
   ribcage down with a tightly engaged midline.
3. To add more tension and increase the aggressiveness of this
   mobilization, grab the back of your elbow, pull it toward your
   head, and lower your elevation. As you do this, fight to
   maintain external rotation torque.

                           613
Bilateral Shoulder Flexion
    This is another fantastic mobilization that improves your overhead
positioning as well as midrange flexion movements like the bench press
or pushup. What’s different is you’re bringing your arms closer to your
centerline and then adding external rotation. The rotation helps tie in the
posterior shoulder capsule. So unlike the previous mobilizations, which
highlight end-range flexion and then add external rotation, you bias end-
range external rotation first and then add flexion as a tensioner.
    To hit the ugly corners of your external rotators, you want to create
as much torque as possible, which is accomplished by keeping your
elbows close together.
    Here’s why: As you apply tension to the load, your elbows spread
apart. You can’t help it. There is so much torque that when you apply
tension to the position, your elbows go wide and torque is lost. To help
you make the connection, imagine someone pressing a heavy load
overhead with his or her elbows out. If you’ve read the previous chapter,
you know that this is a huge torque dump. The same thing is happening
here. As your elbows go wide, you bleed out torque and the stretch
becomes less intense.
    To prevent your elbows from spreading, have a Superfriend block
your elbows together, or wrap your arms up with a band—see banded
distraction variation.

Improves:
           Overhead Positioning
           Bench Press and Pushup
           External Rotation Torque
           Front Rack Position

Methods:

                                   614
Contract and Relax




                     615
1. Kneel in front of a box with your palms facing toward your
   body and your elbows positioned next to each other.
2. Keeping your elbows as close as possible, rotate the dowel
   and spread your hands apart until you reach end-range
   external rotation.
3. With your shoulders wound up into an externally rotated
   position, apply tension to the load by pushing your body back
   and dropping your elevation. This hits all the big soft tissue of
   the lat, as well as the external rotational features of your
   shoulder.




                            616
       1. Wrap a band into three loops, hook it around your elbows, and
          then bias external rotation by twisting a dowel and spreading
          your hands apart.
       2. With the band preventing your elbows from spreading, you
          can implement the same strategy with the box by sinking
          your hips back and punching your head through your arms.
       3. You can do the same mobilization on the ground.


Super Front Rack
     The super front rack is my go-to mobilization for improving the
overhead position and more specifically (to state the insanely obvious)
the front rack position. The key to this technique is to keep your hand up
and your elbow in while you’re in the position. You’ll find as you step
through and create tension, your hand will turn down and your elbow will
fly out to the side, which are two ways you lose torque. This fault also

                                   617
makes it difficult to maintain a neutral position. When you try to create
tension off an unstable shoulder, it’s much easier to break into
overextension. The exact same thing happens in the front rack position,
when athletes fail to create a stable platform. They can’t get their elbows
up because their shoulders are douched, so they have to overextend to
maintain an upright position. To avoid these faults, try to exaggerate the
hand up position, use your opposite hand on your elbow to prevent it
from flying out, and stay integrated as you walk out to create tension.

Improves:
           Overhead Positioning
           Front Rack Positioning

Methods:

           Contract and Relax




        1. Hook your wrist through the band.
        2. Turn your palm up and wind your shoulder into external
           rotation. As you do this, step through, rotating your body

                                    618
           underneath the band as if you were setting up for a Judo
           throw.
        3. Keeping your palm up, maneuver your shoulder underneath
           the band and stand upright to create tension. Note that I
           squeeze my right glute and keep my abs turned on to avoid
           breaking into overextension.
        4. Still fighting to keep your right palm up, grab the outside of
           your right elbow using your opposite hand (this prevents your
           arm from flying out to the side) and shift your weight forward.


Classic Triceps and Lat Stretch
    Let me ask you something: When is the last time you spent a
significant amount of time smashing and mobilizing your triceps? Wait. I
already know the answer. Never.
    This is a classic triceps stretch that hits the long head of the triceps
and the lats, and some of the structures that limit overhead movement
across the shoulder. To make this mobilization even more effective,
wrap a voodoo band around your upper arm and floss your triceps as
demonstrated below. Guaranteed, voodoo banding and flossing your
triceps will bring new life into an area that has probably been neglected
for your whole life.




                                    619
1. Position your distal triceps and elbow against the wall.
2. Drive your weight into the wall, creating a stretch through the
   long head of your triceps, and latch on to your left wrist with
   your right hand.
3. Still leaning into the wall, force your left arm into flexion by
   pushing your left hand toward your left shoulder. Note: If you
   can do this with a voodoo band, it increases the mobilization’s
   effectiveness by a hundred, maybe more.

                           620
Reverse Sleeper Stretch
     We all have busy lives so we have to find ways to mobilize and
improve positions when we’re jammed into a 737 window seat, or sitting
at the office, and so on. In this sequence, I demonstrate a very low-tech
and highly versatile way to work on the internal rotation of your shoulder.
This is my car/airplane/trapped-in-a-chair internal rotation stretch. It’s
something I’ve done for a long time and still do to this day. An oldie but
goodie.




        1. To begin, pull your left shoulder into a tight position and then
           place your left hand with your palm facing away behind your

                                    621
   lower back.
2. Cock your right arm back. Sometimes reaching across your
   body is difficult with your arm behind your back. If you feel
   you’re going to round forward and compromise your posture
   to grab your shoulder, cock your arm back and swing it
   across your body as demonstrated here.
3. Swing your right arm across your body, grab your left elbow,
   and pull it toward your centerline to bias more internal
   rotation. As you pull your arm across, really focus on keeping
   your shoulder back. If you let your shoulder roll forward into a
   compensated position, you’ll create an impingement and lose
   the effectiveness of the stretch.




                           622
        AREA 3
  ANTERIOR SHOULDER
(PEC, ANTERIOR DELTOID)




          623
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Anterior and lateral shoulder, deltoid, chest, biceps.

Most Commonly Used Tools:
           Single Lacrosse Ball

                                   624
         Softball
         Voodoo Band
         Rogue Monster Band
         Barbell
         Roller

Test and Retest Examples:
         Dip
         Overhead Press
         Hanging from the Bar
         Back Squat Setup
         Front Rack Position
         Pushup and Bench




                                625
Anterior Compartment Smash
     Athletes report to me all the time that they still have a hard time
getting their shoulder into a good position, even after attacking the
thoracic spine and posterior structures. What they forget is that the
condition of the anterior compartment can do as much to limit a good
shoulder position as the condition of the scapula, ribs, and thoracic
spine. It’s an interconnected system. If any of the tissues that attach to
the shoulder blade get tight and short, it will restrict your ability to put
your shoulders in a stable position. For example, if you sit at a desk all
day, or spend a lot of time in a car, or you’re a cyclist, or you’re simply
missing internal rotation, chances are good that you spend a lot of time
in a forward shoulder position. While this compensated position wreaks
havoc on the thoracic spine, scapula, and ribs, your pec minor, which
goes from your shoulder blade to your sternum, gets brutally stiff,
effectively locking your shoulder into an unstable position.
     This is a huge problem because now your arm has to internally
rotate as a way to stabilize your shoulder and rectify your limited range.
It’s your body’s way of dealing with the open circuit of an unstable
shoulder. Internally rotating is less of a liability than having your
shoulder flop around in the socket. So if you spend any amount of time
under load or tension in that compensated position, your pec minor has
to work really hard to keep your shoulder stable, causing it to get
chronically tight as a result.
     In the subsequent mobilizations, I demonstrate a couple of methods
for restoring suppleness to the area. It’s important to note that you can
also perform the anterior compartment smash in a doorway. This
variation gives you a slightly different stimulus because you’re free to
the move your arm in some new vectors, allowing you to hit some nasty
corners that are unavailable to you using the techniques demonstrated
below.



                                    626
Improves:
           Douche Bag Shoulder Syndrome (Stable Shoulder Position)
           Overhead Positioning
           Midrange Pressing (Bench, Pushup)

Methods:

           Pressure Wave
           Contract and Relax
           Smash and Floss




                                 627
628
1. Position a large ball on your pec minor and apply pressure.
   Notice that my right hand is behind my back. This is an easy
   way to not only bias the tissue into internal rotation, which is
   the motion you’re working to restore, but also gives you the
   pressure you need to make change in the area.


                            629
    2. Push off the mat using your left hand, rotate toward your left,
       and pressure wave the tissues.
    3. After hunting out a stiff spot, throw your left arm behind your
       back, and grab your right hand. This puts additional pressure
       into the area you’re trying to change and allows you to kind of
       floss your arm further into internal rotation by pulling your
       right arm up and across your back.


ANTERIOR
COMPARTMENT
SMASH VARIATION




                               630
The doorway pec smash is a way to add a flossing element into the
equation. Also note that you can use a lacrosse ball in place of softball

                                  631
 for more a targeted effect.



Barbell Shoulder Smash
    If you’re missing internal rotation, your entire shoulder complex has
to compensate. Put in enough duty cycles from an unstable position and
you will end up with shoulder pain or worse, an injury. In my practice I
treat a lot of athletes who are missing critical internal rotation range.
One of the first things that I clear is the anterior deltoid in the area of the
upper shoulder. By cleaning up this area, I can effectively fix a lot of the
dysfunctional shoulder mechanics that are typical of most athletes.
    The simple fact is most of us live in a shoulder-forward position. And
the problem is most of the demands of daily life and training involve
loading up the anterior deltoid complex, causing it to get extremely tight.
One of the most effective and easiest methods to unglue matted-down
tissues in this area is to employ the barbell smash or Superfriend
internal rotation smash. When you perform it correctly often enough, you
may feel you’ve been blessed with a new shoulder. I’ve yet to find
anything else that unglues the ugliness and restores internal rotation
faster than these two pieces, specifically the Superfriend variation with a
voodoo banded shoulder. It’s like magic.




                                     632
    The key to this mobilization, whether you’re implementing the
barbell or Superfriend variation, is to lie on your back and avoid getting
into a sleeper stretch position by rolling onto your side. The problem
with the sleeper stretch is that it is ultimately trying to fix internal rotation
from a poor position. You don’t need to fix internal rotation with your arm
across your body. That doesn’t look like anything! What you need to do
is mobilize in positions that look like athletic movements. Think of the
high-hang position, the recovery phase of the swimming stroke, the dip,
or jumping. You get the idea.

Improves:
          Internal Rotation Capacity
          Shoulder Pain


                                      633
           Shoulder Mechanics

Methods:
           Smash and Floss




                                634
1. To set up for the barbell shoulder smash, lie on your back and
   position the notch of the barbell in the anterior deltoid area.
2. Next, throw your right leg over the bar. This not only helps pin
   the barbell in place and adds additional pressure, but also
   helps push your shoulder to the back of the socket. As you do
   this, lie back to put your right shoulder in a good position and
   grab the sleeve of the barbell with your left hand.
3. After you’ve tacked the anterior tissue down, internally rotate
   your hand and push down on the barbell using your left hand.
   The combination of these actions creates a lot of shear, which
   allows you to un-laminate the tissues of your anterior
   shoulder.

                           635
Voodoo Floss: Superfriend Variation
    This is an excellent variation to implement if you have a team of
athletes. You can have one group wrap the arms of the people in the
second group and step on their shoulders, and then switch after a couple
of minutes. It’s literally the fastest and easiest way to improve and
restore internal rotation to the shoulder.




 Starting from the top of the shoulder, I wrap Jesse’s shoulder with
 the voodoo band to create a compression element. To see more on
 how to correctly wrap using the voodoo floss band, revisit the
 introduction to this chapter (see here).




                                  636
        1. After wrapping his shoulder, Jesse lies on his back and
           positions his arm at a 90-degree angle. To ensure his
           shoulder is in a good position and help tack-down his
           laminated tissues, I step on the front of his shoulder with the
           ball of my right foot.
        2. With my foot tacking down his shoulder, Jesse internally
           rotates his arm past my foot, effectively ungluing all the
           matted-down tissue of his shoulder.


Bilateral Internal Rotation Mobilization
    The bilateral internal rotation mobilization is a quick and dirty way to
work on extension and internal rotation. As with the voodoo floss
Superfriend variation previously demonstrated, this is another excellent
mobilization that you can throw into a big group of athletes in a class
setting.
    What’s important to note is that you can’t relieve truckloads of

                                    637
muscle stiffness or restore a lot of motion to the joint with just a static
stretch. For optimal results, you have to tie in the contract and relax
element and try to work in and out of end-range tension. In addition, you
really have to focus on keeping your shoulders pinned to the mat and
avoid compensating into a forward-rolled position as you lower your
hips into your hands. This can be very difficult to do, especially if you’re
missing some of these key internal rotation and extension corners. The
best way to deal with this issue is to have a friend press down on your
shoulders. This not only ensures that your shoulders remain in a good
position, it allows you to hit some more extreme vectors.
    Personally, I only like doing this mobilization when I have a
Superfriend on hand because it’s so difficult to keep your shoulders
back. However, even if you don’t have someone to help you out, this is
an excellent mobilization to see just how your body compensates for its
lack of range. You can really feel what’s happening. Sometimes when
you’re descending into a dip, it’s less obvious. You can’t feel when you
compensate. Setting up in this position, on the other hand, will tell you
exactly if it’s motor-control or a mobility issue. It makes the invisible,
visible.

Improves:

          Extension and Internal Rotation (Dip)
          Midrange Pressing (Bench, Pushup)

Method:

          Contract and Relax




                                    638
1. To set up for the mobilization, drive your heels into the mat,
   bridge your hips, and drive your shoulders to the back of the
   socket.
2. Maneuver your hands underneath your lower back.
3. To add a tension force, slowly drop your hips toward the mat
   and lower your back into your hands. From here, you can
   contract and relax as well as oscillate in and out of end-range
   tension. It’s important that you avoid compensating into a
   forward-rolled position as illustrated. You have to fight this
   force and control the tension.




                           639
1. I’ve positioned my hands over the front of Carl’s shoulders
   with my palms facing away from my body. Before Carl starts
   to lower his hips, I load some pressure into the front of his
   shoulders.
2. As I keep Carl’s shoulders pinned to the ground, he lowers
   his hips into his hands to apply a tension force.

                          640
Banded Bully
     It’s not easy to improve extension and internal rotation without ending
up in a weak shoulder position. This is why I recommend the
Superfriend variation of the previous entry. It prevents you from blowing
off torque, dumping tension, and defaulting into a crappy forward
shoulder position.
     If you don’t have a Superfriend in range, the banded bully is good
alternative. As you can see from the photos, the band pulls my shoulder
to the back of the socket, which not only allows me to mobilize from a
stable position, but also intensifies the work.




        1. Hook your right arm through the band over your anterior
           deltoid and position your arm behind your lower back. To

                                    641
           keep your right arm in place, latch on to your right wrist using
           your left hand.
        2. To create tension in the band, lean forward and allow the band
           to pull your shoulder into the back of the socket.
        3. With your right shoulder locked into an ideal position, start
           hunting for stiffness by pulling your right arm up and across
           your body using your left hand. This helps bias internal
           rotation with extension. You can also tilt your head to tie your
           neck into the mobilization.


Triple Bully
     The bully sequences look a lot like a cop restraining a purse-
snatching suspect with a behind-the-back arm lock. If you’ve ever been
winched into this position you know how much it hurts, especially when
applied correctly and with the right amount force. The lock is effective
because it forces your arm into red-hot corners that you never really
explore on your own time. Not to mention the fact that you’re probably
missing serious internal rotation. No wonder you submitted so easy!
     The triple bully is designed to hit these corners using three key
motions. With your hand fixed to a pole or rack, first step away to create
extension; second, twist away from the arm you’re mobilizing to bias a
little bit more adduction (moving toward your centerline); and third, drop
your elevation and pull your fixed arm up and across your back to add
more internal rotation.
     As with any mobilization, you have to use a combination of motions
to bring the most change. Thinking in terms of singular motions, like
flexing for example, is a mistake. You’re never going to express the true
nature of the joint and how it moves. But the triple bully—that’s another
story. The combination of these three motions allow you to wind up your

                                    642
shoulder in a tight position and floss in and out of some really stiff and
painful vectors of the joint that rarely get attention. It’s an easy way to
mobilize your shoulder into some crazy positions without having a cop
put you in an arm lock and push you into the back of a squad car.

Improves:

          Extension and Internal Rotation (Dip)
          Midrange Pressing (Bench, Pushup)

Method:
          Contract and Relax




                                    643
Bully Extension Bias
    There is considerable overlap among the shoulder mobilizations.
That’s a good thing because they all have a slightly different stimulus.
Ultimately I want you to play around and use the mobilizations that give
you the best results.
    With the bully extension bias, you’re still working on internal rotation
and extension of the shoulder, but in this particular mobilization you
exaggerate extension first and then add internal rotation as a tensioner.
In addition, because your hand is fixed to the band, you can distract the
joint into the back of the socket, which allows you to put a little bit more
love and attention into the extension of the shoulder. This gives you a
slightly different feel than if your hand is fixed in the same position as in
the triple bully.




                                    644
     1. Hook your right hand through the band.
     2. Wind up your right shoulder into extension by turning your
        body 180-degrees in a counterclockwise direction so that
        your back is facing the structure. As you step through with
        your right foot, rotate your right hand so that your palm is
        positioned toward the ceiling. This helps bias more internal
        rotation of your arm. With your banded hand exaggerated into
        extension, you can contract, relax, and go hunting for some
        tight corners by lowering your elevation and twisting your
        upper body.
     3. After spending some time in some deep extension, go hunting
        for some new corners by twisting away from your arm as if
        you were trying to wrap the band around your body. This adds
        more internal rotation into the mobilization. You can also tilt
        your head to the side to tie in the components of the
        neck/shoulder complex.


Sink Mobilization
                                645
     The sink mobilization is a non-specific mobilization, meaning it
doesn’t really bias the joint, but rather attacks anything that is tight or
limiting your shoulders in extension. It’s a global mobilization. However,
the fact that it’s not a very sophisticated means you can use it just about
anywhere, anytime. If there’s a fence pole, railing, or sink, you can work
on improving your shoulder extension.
     The sink mobilization is especially useful for runners because it
improves pulling the elbow straight back during the running stride. If
you’re missing extension range, you will hit an extension wall as you
pull your arm back during the stride, causing your elbow to fly out, which
in turn forces you into a compensated shoulder position. Here’s what
most people do in that situation: Instead of swinging front to back, which
is the proper technique, they go around the body, which slows them
down, accelerates fatigue, and aggravates tissues. That, and it looks
really weird. Don’t be that person. Learn how to run correctly.

Improves:

         Shoulder Extension




                                   646
Banded Lateral Opener

                        647
    The banded lateral opener is another global mobilization that
exaggerates extension of the arm. But instead of opening the shoulder
into internal rotation, this distracts the shoulder into external rotation and
ties in the front of the chest and puts the pec into a full stretch. It’s quick,
easy, and a beautiful prep for any kind pressing motion, specifically
pushups and bench press iterations.

Improves:
          Midrange Pressing (Bench, Pushup)
          Shoulder Extension

Method:
          Contract and Relax




        1. Hook your right hand through the band and create tension.
        2. Rotate your palm up, biasing external rotation of your

                                      648
  shoulder.
3. Keeping your arm externally rotated and your shoulder back,
   turn away from the band and twist your upper body in a
   counterclockwise direction. This opens up the chest and arm
   and allows you to capture the connective and soft tissues
   along those fascial planes.




                         649
         AREA 4
     DOWNSTREAM ARM
(TRICEPS, ELBOWS, FOREARM,
           WRIST)




            650
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Triceps, elbow, forearm, and wrist

Most Commonly Used Tools:
          Voodoo Band

                                 651
Barbell
Single Lacrosse Ball
Rogue Monster Band
Roller




                       652
Test and Retest Examples:
        Overhead Press
        Hanging from the Bar
        Front Rack Position

                               653
Back Squat Setup
Pushup and Bench




                   654
Triceps Extension Smash
     Your triceps are wicked strong and account for two thirds of the
mass of your arm. Consider a powerlifter like Mark Bell who can bench
press over 800-pounds. Most of that is triceps. If you are someone who
lifts weights or does CrossFit, you can probably remember a time when
your triceps were so sore that you couldn’t extend your arm. It just hurt
to move. I’d be willing to bet that rather than address the stiffness, you
waited for the soreness to go away or continued to work out with stiff
muscles. Sound familiar? Of course it does. You are an athlete and
that’s what athletes do. But that doesn’t make it right. When your triceps
get tight and nothing is done, they get adaptively short, causing you to
lose extension in your arm.
     If you don’t have the full length of your triceps, creating external
rotation torque and locking out your elbow is difficult. Elbows tend to
chicken flap out into a compromised position. The same thing happens
with your legs in the squat when you have stiff quads. You end up
missing external rotation and dumping torque by collapsing your knees
inward. Restore suppleness to your quads and you can solve this
problem.
     These big tissues, whether it’s the triceps or quads, dictate your
capacity to generate stability in your primary engines. The triceps affect
your shoulders and the quads affect your hips. If these regions get stiff,
it’s going to reflect in your movement mechanics and eventually express
itself in the form of pain. That means you have to address the ugliness
by smashing away the stiffness so that you can reclaim stable positions.
And the triceps extension smash is one of the best ways to accomplish
that.

Improves:

         Elbow Extension


                                   655
          Front Rack Position
          Midrange Pressing Mechanics
          Overhead Position
          Elbow Pain

Method:
          Contract and Relax
          Pressure Wave
          Smash and Floss




                               656
657
 If you don’t have a rack, don’t panic. You can do this on the ground
 using a barbell, lacrosse ball, rolling pin, wine bottle, or whatever
 you have at your disposal. Find something to smash your triceps on
 and get some work done.




Voodoo Elbow Mobilization
    Wrapping a voodoo band above and below your elbow and then
spending a few minutes moving through a full range-of-motion is one of
the fastest and most effective ways to address elbow pain and restore
suppleness to your triceps. If your elbow aches, or you’re missing key
corners in your mobility—elbow extension or flexion—this should be
one of your first stops. In fact, if I have an athlete that is suffering from
epicondylitis (tennis elbow), this is the first thing I have them do.
Seriously, nothing I’ve seen, experienced, or been taught solves “hot
elbow” problems as quickly and effectively as the voodoo elbow
mobilization. To learn more about proper wrapping technique, revisit the
introduction to this chapter.




                                    658
After I finish wrapping an athlete’s elbow, the first thing I’ll do is rotate
his elbow toward the ground, position his palm flush against my chest,
and then pull his arm into full extension. As I do this, I’ll externally rotate
his arm to capture all the corners of the joint. The role of the Superfriend
is to force the elbow into as much range-of-motion as possible while
making sure your partner doesn’t pass out. As with most of the highly
effective mobilization techniques, voodoo flossing your elbow is not a
pleasurable experience. This is why having a Superfriend manipulate
your arm into key ranges is ideal, because he or she is not limited by
your pain. However, like all Superfriend mobilizations, you probably
need to pick and respect the use of a safe word.



                                     659
Placing your palm on the ground is a great way to encourage flexion and
extension movement through the elbow. The idea is to explore different
positions and accumulate 15 to 20 arm bends.




One of the best aspects of voodoo flossing is that you can mobilize in the
position you’re trying to change. For example, if you’re benching,
pressing, or doing a workout with a lot of pushups, wrap your elbow and
perform the movement you are about to perform.

                                   660
Anchoring your hand to a bar and twisting your body is a great way to tie
in the rotational components of your elbow. The key is to spend some
time in both hand positions: supinated (chin-up grip) and pronated (pull-
up grip).



                                  661
Banded Elbow Extension
    The elbow is a workhorse. It’s insane. Think about how much you
use and count on the work flowing through your elbows. Flexing and
extending your arms are a big part of daily life. So it’s no great mystery
that arms and elbows get stiff and painful, and full extension of the arm
comes with a grimace (if at all).
    The trouble tends to spread. Consider an athlete—with limited
range-of-motion in the elbows—pressing a barbell overhead. As he
nears locking out with his elbows, he flares his elbows out and rolls his
shoulders forward. He’s risking more pain and injury to make the lift.
    People tend to think of the elbow as a simple joint that just bends and
extends. But there’s a rotational component that contributes to generating
shoulder stability. This goes back to the idea that the smaller structures
dictate the capacity to create stability in the primary engines. In this
case, it’s your shoulders.
    Think of the front rack position. Being able to externally rotate your
shoulders into a good position to create a stable platform is predicated
on having full range-of-motion in your downstream joints like your
elbows and wrists. In other words, missing extension doesn’t just affect
your ability to lock your arms out, it also messes with your ability to
create the rotation in your elbows that helps stabilize your shoulders.
    People think they can get away with missing a little bit of extension in
their elbows. They can’t. To get an idea of what I’m talking about, try this
simple test:
    Get in the pushup position, bend your arms slightly, and then
externally rotate your arms to create a stable shoulder position. Then,
lock your arms out and do the same thing.
    As you will find, locking out your arms creates a much stronger and
stable position. If you don’t have full extension in your elbows, perform
this test using the squat. Stand with your knees slightly bent, and then
create external rotation force by forcing your knees out. Then, do the

                                    662
same thing with your knees locked out. What you’ll find is that when
your knees are locked out, your butt turns on and you can really feel the
stability of your position. Per the one-joint rule, the same thing happens
in the shoulders.
     So let’s go after restoring full range-of-motion to the elbows.
     As you can see from the photos, I work the elbow from two different
positions to account for the rotational component of the structure. The
key is to floss in and out of extension by bending your elbow into the
band and then, with control, slowly straighten your arm into extension,
really allowing the band to distract the joint to the end-range of the
capsule.
     Note: For the best results, execute the following mobilizations with
a voodoo banded elbow. As a case study example, Sarah Hopping—All
American hammer thrower and CrossFit phenomenon—came to my
practice at San Francisco CrossFit seeking to correct her elbow
position and fix the concurring pain. She had broken the head of her
radius, a catastrophic injury, and couldn’t lock out or extend her elbow to
end-range. This dramatically restricted overhead positions. I saw her for
one session and essentially focused on voodoo flossing her elbow using
the techniques below. With just a little bit of voodoo love, we managed to
restore full-range to the joint. She ended up winning the snatch ladder at
the NorCal CrossFit 2012 Regionals shortly after. Her physicians were
left in disbelief. The moral of the story is this: If you can wrap a
compression band around your elbow and voodoo floss using the below
techniques, do it. It will work miracles!

Improves:
         Elbow Extension
         Rotational Capacity
         Overhead Positioning


                                   663
          Pushup and Bench

Method:
          Flossing
          Voodoo Flossing




      1. Hook a band around your elbow and create tension by sliding
         your arm back. Notice that my fingers are pointed in the
         direction of the band.
      2. Staple your palm to the mat by placing your right hand over
         your left hand.
      3. Keeping your shoulder in a stable position, flex your elbow
         into the band.
      4. Controlling your arm into extension, allow the band to pull
         your elbow to its end-range position. From here, flex and
         extend your elbow until you have full range-of-motion or you
         can feel change in the joint capsule.




                                 664
 To capture the entire capsule, you have to hit the elbow from an open
 palm position and a closed palm position. In other words, you’re
 working from a full pronation and full supination. This helps account
 for the rotational components of the elbow and ties in the forearm and
 wrist structure.




Banded Elbow Distraction
    The banded elbow distraction is another way to solve poor mobility
in your elbow and treat pain. This technique also works on improving full
flexion of your elbow. As you can see from the photos on the next page,
the band distracts your elbow joint and creates a gapping force in the
crook of your elbow. This distraction force puts your elbow in a good
position with the capsule, which clears any impingement in the joint and

                                  665
allows you to floss unrestricted. The key here is to focus on moving your
arm in different directions. Doing so will account for the rotational
component of your elbow structure and accumulate as many bends in
your elbow as possible.
    Think about the paper clip concept. You’re never going to get
anywhere just bending it back and forth a couple of times. To break the
paper clip, you need anywhere from 30 to 60 bends before it breaks.
That is exactly what you want to do here. To make any kind of change,
you need to oscillate in and out of end-range flexion, as well as explore
the full excursion of your elbow by turning your palm toward and away
from you. It’s not a fixed position mobilization. By turning your hand and
scouring all the ranges of your elbow joint, you completely change the
dynamics of how your elbow is mobilized. Not only that, switching hand
positions helps account for common grips such as chin-ups (palm in or
supinated) or a rack and pulling position (palm away or pronated).

Improves:

          Full Flexion of the Elbow
          Pulling Positions
          Hanging Positions
          Joint Dynamics
          Elbow Pain

Method:

          Distraction with Gapping Bias
          Flossing (Paper-clipping the Joint)
          Voodoo Flossing



                                      666
667
1. Hook the band on the bottom of your forearm, near the crook
   of your elbow, and then push yourself away from the rack to
   create tension in the band.

                          668
       2. Pull your left hand toward your face using your right hand. I’m
          not going to lie: This hurts. Stay out of the pain cave and break
          your elbow like a paper clip until you effect change.
       3. Reposition your right grip on your left hand, hooking the web
          of your right hand around your left thumb and over the top of
          your hand.
       4. Using your right hand, force your left arm laterally toward
          your left side while twisting your palm toward the ground.
       5. To ensure you hit all corners, reposition your grip on your
          hand, this time gripping your left palm.
       6. Twist your palm away from your body.
       7. Pull your left hand to your face, keeping your palm facing
          away from your body.
       8. Reset your position.
       9. Still scouring the full ranges of your elbow, force your left arm
          into flexion while pushing your left hand toward the outside of
          your body with your palm facing away.


Double Lacrosse Ball Smash
    If you’re one of the unfortunate people who are stuck in static
positions at work all day, stretching is not going to do all that much for
you. When your muscles mold and adapt to the positions you are in—
meaning they get adaptively short and stiff—the restoration of elasticity
requires ungluing.
    For example, wrist pain is a common problem of deskbound
athletes. So what do they do about it? Stretches like flexing and
extending the wrist. You need a better plan. To treat the problem, you not

                                   669
only have to address the positions you’re in, but also implement a
combination of smashing, flossing, and distracted joint mobilizations.
     A much better option is to look upstream of the wrist and attack the
tissues that are pulling on your elbow and hand. Your forearms do an
unbelievable amount of work for your hands and you probably do nothing
for them. No wonder you have tennis elbow or you can’t assume a good
front rack position. The strings that control the hands have turned into
steel cables.
     Here’s the bottom line: If you have elbow or wrist pain, your
forearms probably need some love. You can work on these tissues
using the double lacrosse ball smash, which is demonstrated below.

Improves:
          Wrist and Elbow Pain
          Wrist and Elbow Joint Dynamics (Extension, Flexion, and
          Rotation Capacity)

Method:
          Smash and Floss
          Pressure Wave
          Contract and Relax




                                  670
        1. Position your forearm over a lacrosse ball with your palm
           facing the ceiling. Note: You can place the bottom ball
           anywhere in the meat of your forearm, ideally on a stiff spot.
        2. Position another lacrosse ball directly over the bottom
           lacrosse ball and drive it into your forearm using your
           opposite hand, effectively sandwiching the tight tissue.
        3. Maintain downward pressure using your left hand while
           flexing your right wrist.
        4. From here, make circles, flex, extend, and try to move your
           hand around in all directions. Once you feel some change,
           move on to another tight spot.

Banded Wrist Distraction with Voodoo Wrist
Sequence
    The banded wrist distraction is similar to the ankle mobilizations in
that you really just work on oscillating in and out of range to improve the
dynamics of the joint. It’s a simple mobilization that is very effective for
treating wrist pain. It’s also a great way to prep for any kind of front rack
demanding exercise. For the best results, wrap your wrist with a voodoo
band and work your way through the voodoo wrist sequence
mobilizations.

Improves:

          Joint Mechanics
          Wrist Pain

Method:

          Flossing

                                    671
 Voodoo Flossing




1. Hook a band around your wrist.
2. Slide your hand across the mat to create tension in the band.
   This distracts your wrist joint into a good position. Once
   accomplished, staple the base of your hand to the ground with
   your left hand.
3. Blocking your right wrist with your left hand, lockout your
   elbow, extend your right arm over your right hand. From
   here, floss back and forth in and out of end-range until you feel
   some change in the joint.




                            672
Start the wrap from the base of your hand and work your way up your
forearm. At about a quarter of the way up your arm, you can cross the
band back and forth over the banded area, or work your way back down
the arm. The key is to cover the area shown in the photo.




                                 673
Once you’ve wrapped your wrist, try playing around with different
mobilizations by forcing your wrist into common positions.




                                674
Combining a distraction with a voodoo band is always a good idea.
As with the elbow extension, block your wrist, lockout your elbow,
and extend your arm over your planted hand, flossing in and out of
end-range.




                                675
This voodoo band wrist mobilization gets a gold star for effectiveness.
This should be the first stop for keyboard warriors who suffer from stiff
thumbs and wrists. To execute this technique, make a fist over your
thumb and then lockout your arm while bending your wrist toward the
ground. This will help unglue the laminated tissues that surround your
thumb and wrist complex, restoring sliding surfaces to that region.




                                   676
         AREA 5
          TRUNK
(PSOAS, LOW BACK, OBLIQUE)




            677
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Psoas, low back, abdominals, obliques, and QL

Most Commonly Used Tools:
          Single Lacrosse Ball

                                 678
Double Lacrosse Ball
Large Ball (Softball, Small Deflated Soccer Ball, Kids Ball,
etc.)
Roller




                        679
Test and Retest Examples:
        Global Extension
        Overhead Press
        Hanging from the Bar

                               680
Squat and Overhead Squat




                      681
Low Back Smash: Single Lacrosse Ball
    If you have low back pain, put this mobilization at the top of your list.
By sticking a single lacrosse ball in the low back and upper glute region,
you can effectively unglue the matted-down tissues that cause low back
pain and restrict movement and positional mechanics.
    It is better to perform this mobilization with your feet elevated, either
on a box or a chair. There are three reasons for this. First, it’s easier to
mobilize in a good position without breaking into overextension. Second,
you can get more pressure into the ball, which is necessary for effecting
change in the tissue. And third, it takes the slack out of the musculature
of your trunk and low back. You take up the soft tissue slack in your
lower back, making it easier to maintain a neutral spinal position.




                                    682
 The goal is to work back and forth from the side of your hip to your
 spine, trying to stay on the crest of the pelvis and superior glute.


Improves:
         Low Back Pain and Stiffness
         Position Mechanics (Neutral Posture)

                                  683
          Rotational Capacity

Method:
          Pressure Waving (Side-to-Side)




      1. Place the lacrosse ball on your lower back just above your
         pelvis and position your feet up on a box. It’s important that
         you focus on keeping your midline engaged so that you can
         maintain a neutral spinal position. If you overextend by tilting
         your pelvis, which is a very common fault, you will only
         make your low back pain worse.
      2. Slowly shift your hips toward your left. The goal is to grind
         back and forth against the grain of the muscle and slowly
         smash the tissue using the pressure wave technique.



                                  684
Back tweak? Reset your pelvis!
     Low back pain either stems from long hours of sitting with poor
posture, or moving and lifting in a compromised position. Once you
ingrain dysfunctional movement patterns or adopt a poor position
while in the seated position, low back pain turns into a real problem.
You can treat the issue using mobilization techniques, but the moment
you default into your bad positions, it flares up again. That is why I say
things like, “The number one predictor for low back pain is a previous
history of low back pain.” Once you burn out your duty cycles, the
issue persists. Unless you address your position and perform
constant maintenance on the problem areas, it’s always an issue.
     If you don’t have a previous history of low back pain, on the other
hand, the number two predictor of back pain is having a pelvic rotation
obliquity stemming from a back tweak. For example, if you were to
tweak your back playing sports or doing whatever, chances are good
that one side of your pelvis has been rotated out of position, creating
side-to-side differences in your mobility. So if you have one hamstring
that is a lot tighter than the other pulling down on one side of your
pelvis and you try to lift a large load, it creates a rotational shear on
your hips and pulls your pelvis into a bad position, which in turn
tweaks your low back. You don’t even have to be lifting a heavy load
for this to occur. Sometimes low back tweaks happen when you’re not
braced and you rotate or move the wrong way. Regardless of how it
happens, there’s a really simple technique that you can use to reset
your pelvis into a neutral position.
     The idea here is to use rotation and counter rotation by pushing on
one knee and pulling on the other. This action fires your hamstring and
hip flexor at the same time for the purpose of resetting your pelvic
position. The general prescription is to hold both positions for five
seconds while resisting the pressure with your legs, switch sides
three or four times, and then finish by squeezing a ball between your

                                   685
knees as hard as you can. This last step helps reset the pubic
symphysis.
    To put it in simple terms, you’re using your muscles to restore a
normal pelvic position. Often times, you’ll hear a pop or feel the pelvis
‘clunk’ into position.




                                  686
Low Back Smash: Double Lacrosse Ball
     If you have a stiff lower back, chances are good that you’re missing
normal motion in your lumbar spine. This makes you highly vulnerable
to back tweaks. In this sequence, I show a really simple mobilization to
restore basic spinal motion and relieve stiffness to your low back. It’s
very similar to the low back smash, but instead of working on the
muscles that tie into the area, you target the motion segment vertebra of
your lumbar spine. The former deals with muscles stiffness, while the
latter addresses joint mechanics. But unlike using a single lacrosse ball,
you don’t have to worry as much about overextending because the ball
supports both sides of your spine. However, that doesn’t mean you can
put your abs to sleep. You want to keep enough tension to maintain a
neutral position and avoid tilting your pelvis as you drop your knees from
side to side.




                                   687
The idea is to hit each motion segment of the spine stretching from the
base of your ribcage to your pelvis.

Improves:
         Relieves Lower Back Pain
         Lumbar Joint Mechanics

                                  688
Global Rotation
Unlocks Stiff Lower Back




                       689
690
        1. Position a double lacrosse ball on your lower back between
           the motion segments of your vertebra. To avoid breaking into
           overextension, keep your midline engaged and your hips off
           the ground. A helpful cue is to think about creating a long
           spine as you drop your knees toward the ground. Also, if you
           want to increase the pressure, you can post your feet up onto
           a box or chair or lift your legs into the air.
        2. Drop your left knee toward your right side and rotate your
           hips slightly.
        3. With your motion segments still blocked, rotate your hips and
           drop your right knee toward your left side. It’s important not to
           over rotate and lose shoulder contact with the ground. Rotate
           back and forth from side to side until you feel some change
           and then move up or down to the next motion segment.


Oblique Side Smash
    If you’re walking around with a tight low back, you need to make sure
you address all of the tissues that tie into that lumbar region. One of the
biggest mistakes that you can make as an athlete is to only mobilize the
area of localized pain and stiffness. While you obviously want to address
any ugliness in the areas where you feel most restricted, you also have
to work on the surrounding structures so that you can feed some slack to
those tight tissues. For example, in this sequence I demonstrate a very
simple side smash that targets the oblique and other lateral units that tie
into the low back structure like the high glute and tensor fasciae latae. In
most cases, these tissues are very restricted and need to be unglued
with some smashing. The best way to accomplish that is to pressure
wave back and forth over a Rumble Roller (MobilityWOD.com)
between your ribcage and hipbone. Although the Rumble Roller works

                                    691
the best, you can also use a lacrosse ball or anything that digs into the
ropey tissue.

Improves:
          Low Back Pain
          Global Rotation
          Lateral Extension

Method:

          Pressure Wave




        1. Start on your side with the rumble roller positioned between
           your ribcage and hipbone.
        2. Roll toward your right side and twist your torso over the
           roller, smashing your oblique, QL, and high glute.
        3. To make this mobilization more aggressive, you can lengthen
           the tissues by stretching your arm overhead.


Classic Spinal Twist
    The classic spinal twist is a global mobilization that catches anything
that is tight in your lower back region. It’s not the first stop you want to
make when addressing low back and lumbar spine issues, but it’s an

                                    692
easy way to relieve stiffness to anything that is tight in that area.




                                     693
694
      1. Lie on your back with your feet on the mat.
      2. Keeping your left shoulder flush with the mat, drop your knees
         to your right side.
      3. Cup your right hand over your left knee, pulling it toward the
         mat, straighten your left arm, and turn your head toward your
         left side.




Obviously, if you can attach a band to your hip and distract toward
your feet, it makes it a hundred times more effective.

                                 695
Lateral Hip Opener
    Athletes with lower back pain will often attack things from the front
and the back, but omit work from the side. You must approach the issue
from all angles. Performing this basic lateral side bend is just you being
responsible for your global stiffness. What you’ll find is that your
obliques, ribs, and QL are tacked-down and really tight, which
contributes to your pain and restriction. This is a very basic mobilization
that you can drop in after a workout, or as you’re watching television. It’s
simple. The key is to keep your hips planted on the ground and your
torso and arm on the same vertical plane as you fall to the side. Imagine
that there are two parallel planes of glass in front and behind your body
that prevent you from folding forward or falling backward.

Improves:
          Global Rotation
          Low Back Pain and Stiffness




                                    696
        1. From the crossed-legged position, pull your right foot over
           your left knee.
        2. With your right leg holding down your left hip, bring your left
           arm over your head and fall to your right side. Keep your
           torso and arm on the same vertical plane as you lean over
           your right hip.


Lateral Side Opener
    This is just a variation of the previous technique, which mobilizes the
lateral compartment encompassing the oblique, QL, ribs, and hip. It’s
important to note that this mobilization can be performed on a keg,
physioball, or a medicine ball stacked on some plates. Just like the
previous technique, you want to avoid twisting as you bend over your
side. Adding rotation will cause you to overextend, which is never okay.



                                    697
        1. Bend over the keg.
        2. Keeping your midline engaged to avoid rotating, reach your
           top arm over your head and bend over the keg.




If you don’t have a keg or physioball at your gym or house, you can still
perform this mobilization by stacking a med ball on some bumper
plates.


Targeted Gut Smash: “The Jilly”
   This is one of my absolute favorite mobilizations. I teach it to
everyone. It comes from the wonderful and twisted brain of Jill Miller of

                                   698
“Yoga Tune Up” fame.
     The trunk is a hardworking system that is bound to get tight,
regardless if you’re organized or disorganized. The simple fact is you
spend a lot of time and energy maintaining and creating stability through
your midline, which causes the layers of your abdominal structure,
particularly your psoas, to get tacked-down and stiff. If you’re hanging
out or moving in dysfunctional positions, the psoas and surrounding
musculature has to work extra hard to stabilize your spine.
     The psoas is a big bastard of a muscle that crosses from your
diaphragm and lumbar region of the vertebral column to your pelvis and
leg. It has the supreme responsibility for stabilizing the spine, flexing the
hip, as well as powering rotation. So if it gets tight and tacked-down to
the surrounding structures, it’s going to cause a lot of problems—like an
inflamed lower back or cruddy movement patterns. This is another
reason why you want to avoid sitting for extended periods of time. With
your hips closed and muscles of your primary engine turned off, your
psoas has to work really hard to keep your spine stabilized.
     Think about it like this. Imagine bending your arm 90-degrees and
then having someone pull on your hand, putting a low-grade tug on your
biceps, for six hours. What do you think is going to happen to your
biceps? It will get brutally tight, causing acute pain at your elbow and
shoulder. This is exactly what happens to your psoas when you sit for a
long time. Your psoas is under constant tension to maintain an upright
position, causing your hips and low back to hurt. This is one of the
reasons I encourage people to use some kind of lumbar back support
that forces you into a neutral position. In a neutral position your psoas
isn’t overburdened trying to maintain normal lumbar curves.
     Always prioritize optimal spinal mechanics by enforcing good
positions. You also have to feed some love to the large muscle that
supports these structures; otherwise you will end up in pain. In the
following sequences, I demonstrate a few different options that you can
use to restore suppleness to your psoas. Please note that these are

                                    699
acute targeted approaches aimed at releasing the superficial layers of
stiffness. To get the biggest impact on psoas, as well as hammer the
surrounding abdominal tissues, use the global gut smash demonstrated
in the subsequent sequence.

Improves:

          Low Back and Hip Pain
          Optimal Spinal Mechanics
          Stabilization of the Spine
          Flexion and Extension of the Spine and Hip
          Rotation Capacity

Method:

          Smash and Floss
          Pressure Wave
          Contract and Relax


Psoas Smash and Floss—Option 1
   Although this mobilization represents the lowest form of psoas
smashing, it’s not a bad place to start, especially if you’ve never
smashed your psoas before. Executing this first option will help prepare
you for the more tortuous mobilizations, as well as tap into some of the
superficial layers of the muscle.




                                  700
    1. Position a lacrosse ball a couple of inches to the outside of
       your belly button, and then use both of your hands to push the
       ball into the lateral structures of your abdominals.
    2. Having tacked-down a piece of your psoas, bring your knee
       up and try to floss around the underlying belly tissues
       underneath the ball.
    3. Drop your right knee out to the side, keeping downward
       pressure on the ball. From here, you can move your knee
       from side to side, straighten your leg, or move on to another
       area of your psoas. The goal is to just find an area that feels
       painful, tack-down the tissue, and then apply a flossing
       element.


Psoas Smash and Floss—Option 2
                                701
   This is the same idea as option 1, but instead of using your hands,
you position a kettlebell over the lacrosse ball to get more acute
pressure into the area.




                                  702
1. Position a lacrosse ball a couple of inches to the outside of
   your belly button, targeting your psoas, and then position the
   base of a kettlebell over the ball.
2. With the kettlebell smashing the ball into a stiff spot on your

                            703
           psoas, straighten your leg and begin flossing around the
           tacked-down tissue.
        3. Elevate your knee. From here, you can externally and
           internally rotate your leg, as well as flex and straighten your
           knee until you feel some change in the tissue.


Psoas Smash and Floss—Option 3
    This option gives you a slightly different stimulus by placing your
legs up on a box. This takes a bit of tension out of the psoas, which
allows you to penetrate deep into the pelvic area. The idea here is to just
extend and flex your leg and pull tension into some of the neural tissues
—like the sciatic nerve—to ensure the nerves are flossing smoothly
through the psoas meat tunnel.




                                    704
1. Position a lacrosse ball into your pelvic area just to the inside
   of your hipbone.
2. Next, add pressure by positioning the base of the kettlebell
   over the ball.
3. With the weight of the kettlebell driving the ball deep into your
   pelvic area, straighten your leg and flex your foot. This allows
   you to floss around some of the stiff, tacked-down tissue of
   your psoas.
4. Continue to floss around the tacked-down neural tissues by
   extending your right foot.



                            705
Targeted Gut Smash
    The targeted gut smash allows you to penetrate deeper into the
superficial layers of the psoas and surrounding abdominal tissue.
Although you’re tying in some of the musculature that relates to the
psoas, it’s still a targeted approach because you’re using the point of the
lacrosse ball or softball to tack-down tight tissues. You can use a smash
and floss approach by moving your leg around, or you can roll from side
to side and explore the outside and inside layers of your abdominal
musculature.
    Basically anything that makes you feel like vomiting is probably
worth spending some time crushing.




        1. Lay down over the ball, positioning it just to the outside of your
           belly button.
        2. After finding a stiff spot, take in a big breath, hold it for a few
           seconds and then exhale, relaxing into the ball. With your

                                     706
           psoas and surrounding tissue tacked-down, floss around it by
           curling your left heel to your butt. You can also move your leg
           from side to side.
        3. Still pressuring your weight into the ball, straighten your leg
           and then rotate your body slowly to the side to get a pressure
           wave effect across the tissue.


Global Gut Smash
     As the name implies, the global gut smash hits all of the abdominal
musculature surrounding your psoas. Think of it like this: Using a
lacrosse ball targets one piece of your psoas like a chisel attacks stone;
the global gut smash is like taking a sledgehammer to all the abdominal
musculature and tissue surrounding the psoas, your illiacis and
iliopsoas. Remember, you need these muscles to slide and move over
one another unrestricted. If they are matted-down and adhered, the entire
kinetic system is compromised.
     The fact is that we not only rely on these muscles to stabilize, flex,
and rotate the spine in our day-to-day lives, we spend a ton of our
strength-and-conditioning efforts learning to create and maintain
maximum trunk stiffness. Yet we do nothing to “unstiffify” the area. To
be a fully functioning elite warrior leopard, that tissue needs to be like a
filet mignon, not a grisly piece of beef jerky.
     This mobilization is especially important if you’ve had any kind of
abdominal surgery. Procedures like a C-section or appendectomy leave
a lot of scarred layers of tissue that need ungluing. Moreover, if you have
a history of lower back pain, or if you have to sit down for long periods of
time, this mobilization gets a gold star and should be placed near the
center of your mobility target.
     To correctly execute the global gut smash, use a large ball that has
some pliability. You can use a kid’s ball, which is like a mini physioball,

                                    707
a soccer ball, whatever. The harder ball should be reserved for voodoo
leopard Jedi’s. As you will realize, this mobilization is not pleasant. So
don’t pass out in the back corner of the pain cave or vomit on your living
room floor. That’s not cool. Remember, if the layers of your abdominal
muscles are sliding, as they should, you will have little pain or visceral
symptoms, achiness, pulling, or burning sensations. It will just feel
normal. However, if you’re a tacked-down mess, expect some pain and
discomfort. Ten minutes is the minimum commitment to effect change,
so pony up.
    Note: Don’t do this mobilization before any serious heavy lifting. The
last thing you want to do is monkey around with your spinal mechanics
before you max deadlift. While I don’t think it would cause injury (in fact,
you may experience great exercising after this mobilization), it’s better
to be safe and save it for after the workout.




                                    708
Improves:
        Low Back and Hip Pain
        Sliding Surfaces in Abdominal Musculature

                                709
          Optimal Spinal Mechanics
          Stabilization of the Spine
          Flexion and Extension of the Spine and Hip
          Rotation Capacity

Method:
          Pressure Wave Smash from Side to Side
          Contract and Relax. (Take a big breath in, hold it, and press
          the ball deeper into the tissue.)
          Smash and Floss




The target area for the global gut smash covers the region from the top
of your hipbones, around your pelvis, up to your diaphragm, and around
your ribcage (basically your entire abdominal section).




                                   710
711
1. Lay over the ball, positioning it between your hipbone and
   ribcage.
2. To get the best results, you need to penetrate into the
   basement level of your tissues by sinking all of your weight
   into the ball. To accomplish this, take a big breath in, hold it
   for a few seconds, and then exhale. As you breathe out, relax
   your weight over the ball and sink deeper into your gut as if
   you were a piece of melted cheese.
3. After getting your full weight on the ball, slowly pressure
   wave. If you find a tight spot, you can contract and relax by
   holding in air and then exhaling to sink further into the bottom,
   or implement a smash and floss technique. The key is to
   spend at least 10 minutes on the area—5 minutes on each
   side.




                            712
       AREA 6
POSTERIOR HIGH CHAIN
(GLUTES, HIP CAPSULE)




         713
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Hip (glutes) and hip capsules

Most Commonly Used Tools:
          Single Lacrosse Ball

                                 714
          Rogue Monster Band
          Roller

Test and Retest Examples:
         Squat and Pulling Position
         Lunge and Split-Jerk




                                715
Glute Smash and Floss
    Although there are several habits that create stiffness in the high
posterior chain, there are two that really mess you up: sitting is one, and
assuming an open foot stance is the other. Sitting creates an inordinate
amount of ass lamination, so if you take a long flight, drive in a car for
extended periods of time, or sit at a desk for a living, you have to
constantly work on restoring sliding surfaces to the tacked-down
quagmire that is your butt. The second issue, which can run parallel or
separate to the sitting paradigm, is if you stand or walk around with your
feet turned out. If you’re in a fully externally rotated position with your
feet angled out, the tissues of your posterior high chain are permanently
trapped in a shortened state. The result: Your hip external rotators get
smoked and a lot of full range movements become untenable.
    Want one of the best methods to unglue the laminated tissue of your
butt? Jam a lacrosse ball in the side of your glute and find an ugly area of
trashed tissue. Then use the three sliding surface techniques—pressure
wave, smash and floss, contract and relax. Don’t feel like you need to
overcomplicate this mobilization by targeting specific muscles. People
like to tell you, “Hit your glute mead or short hip rotators.” If your last
anatomy lesson was dissecting a frog, this one might leave you a tad
clueless. What’s important is that you find your business and put in
some qualitative work, staying on the tight area until you make change.
Fundamental stuff.
    As with other large muscle group mobilizations, you don’t need to
cover the entire glute region in one session. Set a timer for 5 minutes a
cheek and put in some work. You’ll be surprised what a difference it
makes. To test and retest, employ the butt acuity test. It’s easy to do and
illuminating. Spend 5 minutes on one butt cheek and then stand up and
squeeze your glutes as hard as you can. What you’ll find is that the side
you mobilized contracts with a lot more force than the other. What does
that mean? You just got a little bit stronger and more powerful. It’s like a

                                    716
free super power.

IMPROVES:

         Hip External Rotation Capacity
         Low Back and Hip Pain
         Hip and Trunk Extension

METHODS:
         Contract and Relax
         Pressure Wave
         Smash and Floss




                                717
718
Position a lacrosse ball in the side of your hip.




                                    719
With the ball tacking down the underlying muscle, move the surrounding
tissue around the area by externally rotating your leg and dropping your
knee to the mat.




                                  720
Continue to floss the tacked-down tissue by pulling your knee in toward
your center.




                                  721
In addition to smash and flossing with internal and external rotation of the
leg, you can try slowly rolling side to side across your glute. With this
you want to really focus on pancaking across the grain of the tissue in a
pressure wave fashion. If you stumble across a particularly painful area
in the process, you can contract and relax until you get to the bottom of
the tissue.


High Glute Smash and Floss

                                    722
     Your glutes are responsible for extending your hips and trunk. When
these tissues get tight, generating force through your primary engine
becomes difficult. Think about it like this: If you can’t open your hips to
full extension, the only way to achieve an upright torso is to overextend,
forcing the musculature of your trunk and lumbar region to stabilize
around your bad position. What happens? You lose your ability to
generate force and you end up with low back and hip pain. By simply
ungluing the musculature of your high glute and butt region, you can
resolve a lot of your positional mechanics and pain up and down stream.
In most cases, ten minutes of qualitative smashing allows you to
reclaim a neutral posture, create sufficient external rotation torque, and
generate force through your primary engine. Not only that, you feed
slack to the tissue upstream, relieving low back pain.
     For the best results, post your feet onto a box or a bench. This will
allow you to capture the high glute region underneath the back and iliac
crest of your hip. In addition, elevating your feet allows you to get more
pressure through the ball. It also allows you to feather from side to side
across the grain of your muscle, which is the best way to break up the
tissue and restore suppleness to the region.
     Note: This mobilization is often used in conjunction with the single
lacrosse ball low back smash.

IMPROVES:

         Sliding Surfaces
         External Rotation Capacity
         Low Back and Hip Pain
         Hip and Trunk Extension

METHODS:

         Pressure Wave

                                   723
Smash and Floss




                  724
       1. Position a lacrosse ball on your upper glute to the outside of
          your sacrum. To increase the pressure and prevent defaulting
          into an overextended position, position your feet up onto a box.
       2. Curling your left heel into the box, slowly roll toward your
          right side, smashing all the tissues across your upper glute
          region. The goal here is to pressure wave across the grain of
          the tissue. If you find a really sticky spot, floss around the
          tacked-down tissue by pulling your knee to your chest, and
          internally and externally rotate your leg.


Side Hip Smashing
   The side hip smash is another easy way to restore good hip function,
as well as feed some slack upstream and downstream of your primary
engine (hip). There are two areas that you’re trying to capture with this

                                  725
mobilization. As you can see from the photos, you start on the posterior
region of the upper glute, which comes into the top of the hipbone, and rip
across that muscle into your hip flexor wad near the front of your hip.
This mass ranging from your posterior glute to the front of your hip gets
chronically stiff and adaptively short. I’m not going to lie. Smashing a
lacrosse or softball across this stiff tissue is horrible. If you’re in public,
you might need to cover up and hide that pain face.

IMPROVES:

          Hip Function (Flexion, Extension, Rotation)
          Low Back and Hip Pain

METHODS:

          Pressure Wave
          Contract and Relax




                                     726
727
        1. Position a ball into the outside of your high glute, just below
           your hipbone.
        2. Roll onto your belly—distributing as much weight as possible
           into the ball—and smash the tissue across the muscle fiber.
        3. Continue to roll onto your side. For privacy, you should use
           both of your arms to cover up your pain face, blocking it from
           view. Nobody needs to see that.


Single-Leg Flexion with ER Bias—Option 1
    This mobilization fits perfectly into our model of mobilizing within the
context of movements we’re trying to change. If you glance at the photos
you’ll notice that I’m essentially mobilizing the bottom of the squat one
leg at a time. It doesn’t need to be any more complicated than that. If I
tried describing what’s happening in the hip in classic terms, it would
hold zero meaning. But if you understand that I’m just squatting one leg
at a time and trying to mobilize the bottom of the squat position, it
becomes very simple and easy to understand. There is purpose and
intention that goes along with the mobilization: If I do this, I will squat
better.
    Here’s how to achieve optimal results: First, you have to apply
motion to this mobilization by hunting out tight corners and then
oscillating in and out of those vectors. Don’t just throw your leg up, drop
your knee out, and then hang out. If you’re tight in that first position, try
capturing the tight pieces of your hip capsule by drawing small circles
with your elevated hip. Once you feel like you’ve made some change,
turn away from your elevated leg or rotate your belly button toward your
knee while shoving your knee out. You can also shoot your hips back
and extend your lead leg, which ties in the hamstring and allows you to
hit a different corner of the hip. To put it simply, you want to capture all


                                    728
the different pieces of the tissue by moving your hip into different
positions, and then “break the paper clip” by moving in and out of end-
ranges.
     The second key is to consider proper squat mechanics as you hunt
around for tight corners. For example, the most common fault with this
mobilization is to let your foot come off the ground as you drive your
knee out to the side. Although this is a great way to capture some
elements of your hip that might be tight (something that I demonstrate
later), it doesn’t necessarily fit into this mobilization piece. The reason?
The moment your foot comes off the ground, you start bleeding torque
out of your ankle and biasing a different range, which does not represent
proper squat mechanics. Stapling your foot to the ground allows you to
tie in your ankle range and most closely represents what you’re trying to
change, which is a foot flat movement in a weight-bearing squat
situation. The same rules apply to other faults like tracking your knee
over your foot and breaking at your lower back to hit certain corners. If it
doesn’t make sense mechanically, don’t do it.

IMPROVES:
          Bottom of the Squat
          Deadlift Setup
          Overall Hip Function
          Hip Flexion with External Rotation
          Low Back and Hip Pain

METHODS:
          Paper-clipping (Oscillation)
          Contract and Relax
          Smash and Floss

                                    729
730
Banded Distraction
    Although this mobilization will provide some radical change without
a distraction, it’s always better to use a band when possible. Creating a
distraction can multiply the effectiveness of the mobilization by a factor
of 4 or 5. With this mobilization, you can create a distraction to the hip in
two different directions. You can distract laterally, pulling your hip into
the side of your capsule, or you can distract toward your posterior end,
pulling your hip to the back of your socket. There’s no wrong way. The
idea is to change the orientation of the distraction so that you can
magnify the stretch and clear any impingement that you may have.




                                    731
Single-Leg Flexion with ER Bias—Option 2
    The single-leg flexion with external rotation bias acts as a two-for-
one mobilization: You’re capturing a flexion with external rotation piece
with the lead leg and an extension piece with the back leg. A lot of
athletes, especially powerlifters the size of highway demolition
machines, are restricted in extension when executing this mobilization
on the floor, which prevents them from dropping into deep flexion in the
front. If that happens, mobilizing with your lead foot up on a box will give
you a much better outcome.
    Aside from elevating the foot, all the same rules apply: Mimic the
mechanics of the squat by keeping your lead foot straight and pinned to
the box, hunt out your stiff corners by forcing your hip into different
positions, and apply the paper clip technique as you scour in and out of
tight areas.




                                    732
1. Post your left foot on the box and pin it to the surface with your
   left hand. To mobilize around a good squat stance, keep your
   lead shin vertical and your foot straight.
2. Keeping your left foot stapled to the box using your left hand,
   slide your right foot straight back and drop your left knee out
   to the side.
3. Rotate toward your elevated knee. This forces increased
   knee-out positioning on your left leg and biases an open hip
   position on your right hip and leg.
4. To bias more hip flexion, rotate toward your right and drop
   your chest toward the box.
5. Continue to hunt for stiff corners by driving your hips back.

                            733
           This captures the back of your hip and biases your hamstring
           into the mobilization.
        6. Having loaded your hip into a new position, slide forward and
           scour for new areas of stiffness.


Banded Distraction
    If you have a band, use it! Applying a distraction will dramatically
increase the effectiveness of this mobilization. As with option 1, you can
distract your hip laterally or toward the back of the capsule.




Hip External Rotation with Flexion—Option 1
    In the previous mobilization elements, you emphasized flexion first,
and then added external rotation as a tensioner. In this series, you do the
opposite. If you glance at the photos, you’ll notice that I emphasize
external rotation first and then load the position with flexion, which

                                   734
provides a slightly different stimulus. As you can see, this mobilization
is very similar to the classic yoga pigeon pose, but with a key difference:
We’re never going to collapse into a flexed, forward-rounded position. In
addition to compromising spinal mechanics, the flexed, forward-rounded
position doesn’t give you the creative leverage to scour into the deep
crevices of your stiffness. By placing one hand on your knee and
blocking your foot with your opposite hand, you can load forward with a
flat back and hunt for tight corners by rotating side to side.
     Let me caution you here: If you can’t position your leg perpendicular
to your body because you’re restricted, or you experience knee pain at
any point, stop what you’re doing and implement one of the subsequent
variations.

IMPROVES:

         Bottom of the Squat
         Deadlift Setup
         Overall Hip Function
         Hip Flexion with External Rotation
         Low Back and Hip Pain

METHODS:

         Contract and Relax
         Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




                                   735
Post your left hand on your left knee, sprawl your right leg back, and
lockout your arms, making sure to keep your shoulders back.




                                   736
Keeping your back flat, lower your chest toward the ground.




With your right hand blocking your foot—which prevents your left foot
from sliding underneath your body and losing tension in the stretch—
rotate toward your left side to hit a different corner.




                                  737
Rotate toward your right side and try to get your belly button over your
left foot.


Hip External Rotation with Flexion—Option 2
     This is the first mobilization that I recommend to people who
experience lateral knee pain in the first position. If you’re so tight you’re
not flexible enough to get your knee to the ground, you end up pulling
your lateral knee joint apart as you load your leg into flexion. By posting
up on your foot and then letting your knee drop out to the side, it solves a
lot of the knee-gapping issues that causes your knee to flare up. Not only
that, the position is much easier to get into because you’re not as
restricted by your back leg in extension.
     Note: If you continue to experience pain in your knee or ankle, don’t
try to be tough and grind through it. There are other ways to approach
this same mobilization without blowing out your knee or putting stress
on your ankle joint. Consider options 3, 4, and 5.




                                    738
Hip External Rotation with Flexion—Option 3
    This is another hip external rotation with a flexion option that you can
implement if you experience lateral knee pain, or struggle to get into an
optimal position from the ground. Even if you’re not limited by range,
positioning your lead leg on an elevated surface is a good option.
Although it takes on the same shape as the variations previously

                                    739
demonstrated, it provides a slightly different stimulus. With your lead leg
elevated, you can get a little bit more hip rotation, and add a more
aggressive flexion load.




Post your right foot on the left side of the box, sprawl your right leg back,
and let your right knee drop to the side, positioning your right leg across
the box. With your lower leg perpendicular to your body, post your left
hand on your right foot, pinning it in place.




Place your right hand on your right knee. To increase the stretch, flex
forward with a level back. From here, you can apply the paper clip
technique by oscillating in and out of end-range by folding forward and
pushing yourself up.

                                    740
Turn toward your left and try to get your belly button over your foot.




Keeping your left foot pinned, rotate toward your right, positioning your
chest over your right knee.




To hit the deep corners of your hip and capture some of that high
hamstring, drop your left knee to the mat and fold forward. This position
should be reserved for supple ninjas.

                                    741
Hip External Rotation with Flexion—Option 4
    There are a lot of athletes who are so stiff they can’t get into any of
the previously demonstrated positions without their knee joint ripping
apart. If you fall into that category, you need to address the stiffness with
some quality quad and hip smashing, and you need protect your knee
joint by dropping your foot off a box. This takes some of the rotational
torque off your joint so that you can explore your business without pain.




Hip External Rotation with Flexion—Option 5
    Here’s the last option in the hip external rotation with flexion series:
Cradle your knee to your chest and add a flexion load by leaning
forward. This allows you to bias external rotation of your hip without

                                    742
challenging your knee joint.




Olympic Wall Squat with External Rotation
   This is another oldie but goodie hip mobilization that works on flexion
and external rotation. Creating a lateral distraction at your hip or
wrapping a band around your knees to account for your hip capsule will
create a larger impact; something that you’ll find is true for the other
Olympic wall squat variations.

IMPROVES:


                                   743
         Flexion and External Rotation

METHODS:

         Contract and Relax




        1. Position your butt as close to the box as possible and assume
           a squat stance with your feet positioned just outside shoulder-
           width. Your shins are vertical and your feet are straight.
        2. Throw your right leg over your left knee.
        3. To increase the aggressiveness of the stretch, pull down on
           your right instep with your left hand and slide your right foot
           toward your hip. Use your right hand to push on your right
           knee.


Executive Hip Mobilization
    Are you sitting in a chair as you read this book right now? If the
answer is yes, you should 1) be ashamed of yourself and 2) at least
make the best of a bad situation and get something done (i.e., stick a ball
into the side of your hip, underneath your hamstring, or bias some
external rotation).
    Warriors in the Supple Legion understand the toxic impact that sitting

                                    744
has on their performance and will do all in their power to avoid it.
However, sometimes you just can’t. If you’re trapped at the desk or
shackled into a Boston-to-LAX window seat, use the following stretches
to work on your hip function and try to reverse the slow pending death to
your mobility.
    Obviously, there are much better ways to work on your hip mobility
than sitting in a chair and trying to stretch! But something is better than
nothing, so putting your hip into these positions and applying the contract
and relax method is definitely useful if you’re stuck in a chair.




                                   745
1. Establish a neutral posture sitting position and then cross
   your right foot over your left knee.
2. With your right leg biased into external rotation, apply a
   flexion load by folding forward from your hips with your back
   flat.
3. Using your left hand to keep your right foot from sliding off
   your left thigh, push your right knee toward the floor and
   lockout your arm. This helps tie in some of the side
   abdominal and low back tissues into the stretch.
4. Still pushing your knee toward the floor and keeping your

                            746
           back flat, rotate toward your right hand and lower your chest
           toward your knee, capturing another piece of your hip.


Executive Hip Workaround
    Sometimes crossing your foot over your knee and adding forward
flexion will cause lateral knee pain in people who are missing key
ranges of motion. If that happens, wrap your arm around your leg and
cradle your knee to your chest. This will take strain off your joint and
allow you to rotate from side to side and apply load without pain.




                                   747
Gentle Hip Distraction
    When I treat people with arthritis or work with an athlete who
tweaked his hip or knee, I generally start with a simple banded joint
distraction mobilization. In these situations, people are dealing with
some bone on bone contact (i.e., femur rubbing against the hip joint) and
inflamed tissue that causes a lot of pain and discomfort. By wrapping a
band around their ankle and adding some tension, you can effectively un-
impinge their hip and give joints some room to breathe. With any luck,

                                  748
you will alleviate pain and reset the joint to the normal, ideal position.

IMPROVES:

          Hip and Knee Pain
          Arthritic or Inflamed Knees and Hips
          Hip Function




                                     749
750
        1. Hook a band around the top of your foot and then wrap it
           around the base of your heel.
        2. Create tension in the band and then prop your foot onto a foam
           roller. This will help keep your hip in a neutral position and
           maximize the distraction force through the ankle.
        3. To encourage a neutral pelvic position and help prevent
           defaulting into an overextended position, curl your free leg in
           tight to your body, keeping your foot on the mat, and lie back.
           The idea is to relax your leg and allow the band to pull and
           decompress your joints, giving your knee and hip some
           breathing room.


Hip Capsule Mobilization—Option 1
    Remember, it’s not just your muscles that get tight. Your joint
capsule system accounts for a huge chunk of tissue restriction. Here’s
an example: Say you experience an impingement at the front of your
hips when you squat, restricting your range-of-motion. This is what I
refer to as a “flexion wall,” which is your femur running into the front of
your pelvis. In order to reach end-range, you now have to compensate
by turning your feet out or overextending.
    If that happens, one of the first things you should do is reset the
positioning of your hip to the back of the socket. Accomplish this by
using the hip capsule mobilization. By aligning your knee directly
underneath your hip and loading your weight over your femur, you can
drive the head of your femur into the posterior capsule and restore
normal hip function. It’s a quick and dirty way to improve the efficiency
of your hip mechanics without having to go see a physical therapist.
    The goal here is to spend at least two to three minutes (or longer if
possible), ideally using a band to distract the hip into a good position. To

                                    751
measure your results, you can test and retest by squatting or by lifting
the knee you mobilized toward your chest from the standing position.
You’ll most likely find that simply resetting your hip to the back of the
socket dramatically improves your hip flexion.
    Note: We secretly call this the Donny Thompson World-Record-
Breaking Squat Technique because he was able to reclaim a better
position and smash the world record squat simply by mobilizing his hip
capsule. He did this after failing in three previous attempts.
Implementing this hip capsule mobilization is the only thing he changed
as he prepared for his fourth attempt. Amazing.

IMPROVES:
         Squat and Pulling Mechanics
         Flexion and Extension of the Hips
         Intra-Articulation of the Hip (Internal and External Rotation)
         Proper Hip Function

METHODS:

         Paper-clipping (Oscillation)
         Contract and Relax




                                   752
Hip Capsule External Rotation—Option 2




                      753
Banded Distraction
     A lot of people will feel an impingement in the front of their hip when
executing this mobilization. Here’s what’s happening: The head of your
femur is positioned to the anterior edge of the socket, pinching some
tissue between your femur and acetabulum (the housing of the hip joint).
If this happens, mobilizing without a band is simply a waste of time. To
make an impact on the hip capsule, wrap a band around your hip crease
and create a lateral or posterior distraction. This will clear any
impingement that you may have in the front of the capsule, allowing you
to drop your hip to the back of the socket.

                                    754
Hip Capsule Internal Rotation
    Internal rotation capacity is critical for creating stability when your
leg is behind you. It also plays a role in creating torque when your legs
are in flexion, like when your knee is in the out position in the bottom of a
squat. To help you understand this, think of internal rotation as an
expression of your capsular slack. In other words, if you’re missing
internal rotation range, you won’t be able to externally rotate when your
leg is flexion, like when you’re squatting; or internally rotate when your
leg is behind you in extension, like when you’re running or performing a
split-jerk. Essentially, without this, you won’t be able to create
mechanically stable positions or generate power through your primary
engine.
    In this sequence, I demonstrate a very effective way to restore
internal rotation capacity using the exact same setup as the hip capsule
mobilization. But instead of biasing external rotation by kicking your leg
across your body, you swing your leg to the outside of your body and
hook your foot on a weight such as kettlebell.

IMPROVES:

          Internal Rotation Torque


                                     755
      External Rotation Torque
      Capsular Slack
      Hip Function

METHODS:

      Paper-clipping
      Contract and Relax




                             756
Cueing Internal Rotation With Distraction
    If the head of your femur is jammed into your hip capsule, it’s difficult
to work on restoring or improving rotational hip range-of-motion using
the hip capsule internal rotation mobilization. For some people,
wrapping a band around their hip and applying a lateral or posterior
distraction is not enough to un-impinge their femur from their hip socket.
They still feel a radical pinch at the front of their hip that prevents them
from correctly performing the hip capsule mobilization. If that happens,
you need to create space within the hip capsule by pulling the joint apart.

                                    757
     If you glance at the photos, you’ll notice that I add a distraction from
my ankle, roll onto my stomach, and then actively internally rotate my
foot. This is the equivalent of distracting your arm overhead and then
actively working on external rotation. But in this case, you’re working on
improving internal rotation capacities with your leg in extension, which
is the stable position for your hip when your leg is behind your body.

IMPROVES:
          Hip Internal Rotation
          Hip Pain and Hip Impingement




                                    758
759
       1. Hook a band around the top of your foot and then wrap it
          around the base of your heel.
       2. Roll onto your stomach. This biases your leg into extension.
       3. Keeping your leg relaxed, actively internally rotate your leg.


Olympic Wall Squat with IR Bias
    This is another mobilization that improves hip internal rotation. From
your back, it’s harder to approximate the hip into the back of the socket
as you internally rotate, so this mobilization is less effective than the
previous technique. However, it’s still a very useful idea and something
that can be used in conjunction with the other Olympic wall squat
variations.




                                   760
      1. Position your butt as close to the box as possible and assume
         a squat stance with your feet positioned just outside shoulder-
         width. You want your shins vertical and your feet straight.
      2. Internally rotate your right leg by dropping your knee toward
         the left side of your body.
      3. Hook your left foot over your right knee to bias more internal
         rotation.


Banded Distraction
  To improve the effectiveness of this mobilization, create a lateral

                                 761
distraction or wrap a band around your knees to approximate your
femurs to the back of the sockets.




Global Internal Rotation
    Although this global internal rotation piece doesn’t give you the same
impact as the hip capsule mobilization or the Olympic wall squat
variation, it’s something that you can do when you’re relaxing on your
back watching TV or just hanging out. As with all the previous
techniques, adding a lateral distraction on the hip you’re mobilizing is
ideal.




                                   762
Internal Rotation Workaround
    As with the external rotation executive hip mobilization pieces, the
internal rotation workaround should not be the first stop when mobilizing
your hip. In addition to putting the muscular of your trunk on tension, you
can’t approximate your hip into a good position, making it easier to
compensate into a bad position. However, if you’re trapped in a chair
and you know you’re going to be there for a prolonged period of time, you
might as well take a crack at improving internal rotation.




                                   763
764
765
766
        AREA 7
   ANTERIOR HIGH CHAIN
(HIP FLEXOR, QUADRICEPS)




           767
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Anterior hip (hip flexors) and quadriceps.

Most Commonly Used Tools:
          Single Lacrosse Ball

                                  768
          Rogue Monster Band
          Roller

Test and Retest Examples:
         Squat and Pulling Position
         Top Position




                                769
Quad Smash
     This is one of my favorite global mobilization pieces because it has
broad range application and applies to everyone. CrossFitters, elite level
Olympic weight lifters, tactical athletes, and desk-bound workaholics all
need tools in their mobility arsenal that address global stiffness in large
muscle groups like the quads, hamstrings, and glutes. They are under
constant tension, put under tremendously large loads, and get adaptively
short from sitting. Yet very little is done to restore suppleness to the stiff
tissue. In this sequence, I demonstrate a potent way to smash your
quads and restore normal function to this large bundle of hardworking
muscle. However, before you delve into the technique, it’s important to
revisit some general rules.
     Rule #1: Go against the grain of the tissue. Whenever you’re dealing
with global smashing elements, focus on slow, qualitative, back and
forth smashing. As with the T-spine smash, rolling up and down the
length of the muscle fiber with zero intention or purpose is a waste of
time. You might as well just do some classic static ‘70s-style stretching
and calisthenics, because you’re not going to change anything. To
produce significant change, create large pressures across the tissue,
applying the big three mobilization techniques: contract and relax,
smash and floss, and pressure wave.
     Rule # 2: Stay on the tissue until you make change. The key is to
clear a section until it normalizes (meaning it’s not painful) before you
move up or down the length of the muscle. When I treat athletes in my
practice, I will smash one leg for no less than 10 minutes before I switch
to the other leg. The point is you need to commit at least 20 minutes (10
minutes per leg) to unglue the tissue. If you can’t clear the entire leg in
10 minutes, remember where you left off and switch to equal out the
other side, then go back and attack the rest of the leg later.
     Rule #3: Use a mobility tool that will make change. To penetrate into
deeper layers of the tissue, you have to apply large blunt pressures. If

                                     770
you’ve never smashed your quad before, starting out with a foam roller
is not a bad idea. However, if you’re a monster athlete, a foam roller will
impact you about as deeply as a bag of marshmallows. If you fall into
this category, use a pipe, barbell, or have a Superfriend stand on your
quad. Be warned, smashing your quads is very painful. You will catch a
lot of people hiding in the deep crevices of the pain cave. It may take
twenty rolls back and forth before you can take the full pressure of your
weight (or friend’s weight) before it stops hurting. So pony up and get
some work done.

IMPROVES:
         Hip Function
         Knee, Hip, and Low Back Pain
         Intra Muscular Stiffness
         External and Internal Rotation

METHODS:
         Pressure Wave (Side to Side)
         Smash and Floss
         Contract and Relax




                                   771
To set up, lay over the foam roller, positioning the roller directly under
your left leg. Notice that I’m on my side. To keep my weight distributed
over my leg, I plant my left foot down while supporting the weight of my
upper body with my arms.




With your weight distributed over your left leg, create a pressure wave

                                   772
across the grain of your tissue by slowly rolling toward your right.




As you roll onto your stomach, plant your right foot on the opposite side
of your leg. From here, you can contract and relax and oscillate on and
off of tight spots.




                                   773
Floss around tacked-down tissue by pulling your heel toward your butt.
The idea is to stay on the tight area, using the smash and floss and the
contract and relax techniques until you no longer feel pain. Once you
clear the area, progress up your quad to clear another chunk of your
muscle.


Barbell Quad Smash
     Next to having a buddy stand on your thigh, the barbell quad smash
is probably the second most effective way to tap into the deep tissue
stiffness of the quad. As I said, you need large blunt forces to effect
change; this is easily done using a barbell. However, going against the
grain of the muscle fiber is difficult using this technique. To restore
sliding surfaces to the underlying tissue, be sure to go very slowly,
clearing one small area at a time. Think about pressure waving back
and forth over stiff muscle bundles until something changes or until you
stop making change. You can also try rolling your leg from side to side
to get the full smashing effect or as a way to tap into different corners.
     Note: The barbell quad smash is particularly effective for clearing
upper quad stiffness near the hip.




        1. Position the sleeve of the barbell over your upper quad. To
           create pressure, lean forward with a flat back and push the

                                   774
           barbell into the meat of your thigh.
        2. Slowly roll the barbell down the length of your muscle,
           maintaining as much downward pressure as possible.
           Remember to focus on small chunks and go as slowly as
           possible. The goal is to create a large pressure wave through
           the tissue. If you encounter a really stiff spot, you can roll your
           leg from side to side as well as use the contract and relax
           technique.
        3. Pull the barbell back up your thigh, internally rotate your leg,
           and prepare to attack a new line. For optimal results, only
           create pressure through the barbell going down the length of
           your leg.


Superfriend Quad Smash
     The Superfriend quad smash is the most efficient way to effect global
stiffness change in your quads. While using a barbell, Rumble Roller, or
PVC pipe on yourself is certainly a good idea, the simple fact is you will
never create the same amount of torturous pressure that someone else
will. No one is that sick.
     To perform this mobilization, have your training partner step on your
quad with the arch of their foot and create large downward smashing
pressures back and forth across your muscle. If it’s you who is doing the
smashing, avoid using pinpoint, lacrosse-ball-like pressures by driving
your heel or ball of the foot into the meat. Uncool at the least. The goal is
to create a shear force across the muscle so that you can restore sliding
surfaces to the underlying tissue, as well as make it a little bit more
tolerable for the guy getting smashed.
     If you’re on the bottom end of the smash, fight the urge to overextend.
Raising your hips is not going to reduce the pain. Also, don’t tap out in


                                    775
submission. It’s not a grappling match. However, you probably need to
pick out and agree on a “safe” word that will get your training partner to
ease up when the pain gets to be too much.
    Note: This is a great mobilization to drop into a large group of
athletes. In fact, the Chinese weightlifting team has been reported to put
on large smashing parties before and after training.




        1. As you’ll see in the photo, I position the arch of my foot on
           Jesse’s quad. Notice that Jesse posts up on his left leg. This
           helps him keep a flat back and reduces some of the extension
           forces (overextending his back) as I mash into his leg.
        2. I shift my weight forward and create a large shear force
           across the top of Jesse’s quad.


Suprapatella Smash and Floss
   If you’re doing a lot of jumping with shins that aren’t vertical—rather

                                   776
your knees are tracking forward when your hips are in flexion—or
you’re performing some sketchy squats where your knees cave in, not
only will you experience knee pain, but you’re burning through duty
cycles at an insanely accelerated rate. Don’t wait until your knee
explodes to do something about it. First, feed some slack to the kneecap
system so that you can reclaim good knee positions and reduce pain.
Second, revisit the load-order sequence and fix your faulty mechanics.
To address the former, snuggle a lacrosse ball into the area just above
your kneecap (the suprapetalla pouch), then apply some pressure and
smash and floss until something changes. To address the latter, flip
back to the chapters devoted to movement mechanics. By opening up
the area right above your kneecap, you can effectively alleviate joint
pain, as well as resolve a lot of the knee dysfunction that occurs in
deeper ranges of flexion.

IMPROVES:
         Knee Pain
         Knee Mechanics and Function

METHODS:

         Smash and Floss
         Pressure Wave
         Contract and Relax




                                  777
1. Position a lacrosse ball on the inside of your leg, just above
   your kneecap.
2. Create a pressure wave across your patellar pouch by

                           778
           internally rotating your knee.
       3. Continue to smash across your suprapatellar pouch and quad
          tendon until you reach the lateral part of your knee.
       4. If you encounter a hot spot, floss around the stiff tissue by
          curling your heel toward your butt.


Voodoo Knee Mobilization
    Guess what? Your kneecap does not stretch. The ligaments and
tendons that make up the knee structure are a fixed length. The best way
to improve knee mechanics (knee out-ness) and reach deeper ranges of
flexion is to feed slack to the knee structure by opening up the
suprapetallar pouch. In that area, you have the common quad insertion,
which shares a large, common tendon sheath entering into your knee.
When this area gets matted-down and stiff, it pulls on your knee
structure, causing pain and faulty mechanics.
    Although the lacrosse suprapatellar smash and floss works, you’re
limited to a tiny spot and can’t get the entire target area. That is why I
prefer the voodoo band variation as the first step in dealing with
upstream and downstream stiffness. It tears open that big common
tendon sheath and clears up the entire area in a very short amount of
time.




                                   779
I’ve wrapped Jesse’s knee with a voodoo band. Notice that I’ve wrapped
below and above the knee using two separate voodoo bands. Note: You
can also wrap the entire knee using one band. To learn how to properly
voodoo wrap, revisit the chapter introduction (see here).




With his knee wrapped, Jesse looks to floss some of the stiffness away
by squatting and biasing some knee-out positions. It’s important to
perform a number of squats, hang out in the bottom position, and force
your knee into end-range flexion positions.

                                 780
Jesse continues to force his knee into flexion by kneeling on the ground
and sitting his butt to his heels.


Banded Hip Extension
    Opening up the front of your hips while kneeling on the ground is not
a new idea (photo 1A). People have been doing this for thousands of
years. But there’s just one problem: The classic kneeling hip opener
does not account for the joint capsule, leaving a huge piece of tissue
restriction on the table. What’s the solution? Simple: Hook your leg
through a band, pull it up to your butt crease, and create a forward
distraction. With a large tension force pulling your femur to the front of
your hip socket, you idealize your joint position, which not only ties in
your anterior hip capsule (y-ligament or iliofemoral ligament), but also
makes it easier to mobilize all the musculature at the front of your hip
structure.
    As you will soon see, there are three ways to bias your anterior hip

                                   781
into extension: banded hip extension, banded hip extension lunge, and the
infamous couch stretch. In this sequence, I start with the most basic of
these elements, the banded hip extension. To correctly perform this
mobilization, create tension in the band and then slowly shift your body
forward while keeping your back flat. A lot of athletes mistakenly arch
the back and hyperextend their back as they open their hip. To avoid this
fault, shift your weight over your grounded knee while keeping your
posture straight and your butt squeezed.
     Note: To capture some of the stiffness in your high anterior hip, put
your left arm over your head (if your left knee is on the ground), lean
back, and then come back to center. The key is to oscillate back and
forth, in and out of end-range. As with the classic hip extension, you
must keep your butt squeezed to support your lumbar spine. This is just
another option that you can infuse into this mobilization. It is a nice way
to tear open that high front hip region, which tends to get very nasty.




                                   782
IMPROVES:

      Hip Extension
                      783
      Hip Extension
      Top Position (Squat and Deadlift)
      Normal Posture
      Low Back and Hip Pain
      Knee Pain

METHODS:

      Contract and Relax
      Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




    1. Hook your left leg through the band and step back to create
       tension—keeping your rear foot internally rotated. To avoid
       breaking into an overextended position, squeeze your left
       glute and keep your belly tight.
    2. With the band distracting your femur into the front of your hip
       socket, slowly shift your weight forward over your grounded
       knee. Notice that I move my entire body rather than thrust my
       hips forward.
    3. For optimal results, hook your foot around a weight so that


                               784
           you can bias internal rotation of your hip, which is the stable
           position for your hip.


Banded Hip Single-Leg Squat
    Mobilizing is a way to deal with muscle stiffness. It restores normal
ranges of motion to tacked-down tissues. It is not a warm-up to
exercise. However, there are some mobilization techniques that are
appropriate prior to training and competition. The banded hip extension
lunge is a perfect example. As you can see from the photos, the setup
looks a lot like a split-jerk, making it a perfect piece to tie into some
Olympic lifting, or anything else that requires you to open up your hips
into full extension.

IMPROVES:
         Hip Extension
         Top Position (Squat and Deadlift)
         Normal Posture
         Low Back and Hip Pain
         Knee Pain

METHODS:
         Contract and Relax
         Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




                                   785
Hook a band around your left leg, pull it up to your butt crease, and step
back to create a forward distraction on your left hip. To avoid breaking
into an overextending position, squeeze your left glute to protect your low
back, and brace your trunk.

                                   786
Keeping your left glute squeezed and your belly tight, drop your left knee
to the ground. Notice that my lead shin does not go past vertical and my
torso is upright.




                                   787
Driving off your lead leg, extend both of your knees and stand up.


Couch Mobilization
                                   788
     The couch mobilization is one of my favorite hip openers and is
probably the most famous technique in the movement and mobility
arsenal. Athletes have a real love-hate relationship with the couch
mobilization because it is both effective and horribly painful at the same
time. In fact, it’s frack-en gnarly. When I first developed this
mobilization, I had to do it on the couch in front of the TV because 1) it’s
an easy way to get your leg into full flexion and open your hips, and 2)
the TV takes your mind off the pain and keeps you from blacking out.
     It’s important to realize that although the couch mobilization is unique
to the Movement and Mobility System, it’s not a new idea. People have
been doing variations of this for a long time. You’d recognize this as the
classic standing quad stretch that you did in elementary school (photo
1), or the traditional yogi pose (photo 2), which requires you to grab your
foot and pull it to your butt while kneeling on the ground. The problem
with these iterations, aside from being difficult to maintain a stable
position, is they do not take you to end-range. To effect change, you need
to be able to mobilize in a good position and hit end-range knee flexion
and hip extension, which is what the couch mobilization allows you to
accomplish.
     Whether you’re trapped at the airport, hanging out watching a movie,
at work in front of your desk, or getting ready to work out, the couch
mobilization is a highly effective way to reclaim range-of-motion and
reduce muscular stiffness in the front of the hips and quads.
     Note: The positions illustrated in the photos are basic physiologic
ranges of motion, meaning everyone should be able to get into position 1
and position 2 without pain or restriction. While this is ideal, it’s just not
possible for the majority of people. So this turns into a really quick
diagnostic for athletes and coaches. If you can’t get your leg into the pre-
start position or pull your back to the wall, you know something is
seriously wrong: Your quads and the front of your hips are freakishly
tight.


                                    789
IMPROVES:
      Hip Extension
      Top Position (Squat and Deadlift)
      Normal Posture
      Low Back and Hip Pain
      Knee Pain

METHODS:
      Contract and Relax
      Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




                               790
791
1. Back your feet up to the side of a box.
2. Slide your left leg back, driving your knee into the corner and
   positioning your right shin and foot flush with the side of the
   box.
3. Squeezing your butt to stabilize your lower back, post up on
   your right foot, keeping your lead shin vertical. Note: If you’re
   unable to post-up on your opposite leg because you’re too

                           792
           stiff, position a small box in front of you for extra stability.
        4. Still squeezing your left glute, drive your hips toward the
           ground. With your lower leg in full flexion (heel to butt), pull
           the tissue slack to end-range (quad and anterior hip
           structure), making it extremely difficult and painful to open up
           the hips. As long as you don’t feel hot, burning nerve pain,
           you’re okay.
        5. After hanging out in the previous position for a minute or two,
           lift your torso into the upright position. If you find it difficult to
           support the weight of your upper body from the upright
           position, position a chair, box, or bench in front of you for
           extra stability.


Common Faults
     One of the biggest issues people have with the couch mobilization is
they can’t get into the correct positions because they are too tight. For
example, it’s not uncommon to see athletes slide their knee out to the
side, pull it away from the corner, or overextend as a way to circumvent
their mobility restriction. If you find that getting into position 1 or 2 is
difficult, keep your opposite knee on the ground and stabilize your weight
on a box. For the best results, put your knee in full flexion so that you can
tie in the quads and open up the business at the front of your hips. And
remember: If your butt goes off tension a dear friend will probably die, so
don’t do it.




                                      793
Super Couch Variation
     The super couch is the DEFCON 5 version of the couch
mobilization. By adding a band and creating a forward distraction you
increase the brutality and effectiveness of this mobilization by a factor of
10. Remember: Anytime you can make a mobilization feel worse, it’s
probably better. Despite increasing your chances of blacking out, the
band opens up your hip capsule and tears into the anterior structures of
your quad and hip like nothing else. The results are truly amazing.
     Disclaimer: If you don’t have full-range in your quads and hips, you
should probably stick with the couch mobilization because adding a band
is like dropping a nuclear bomb on your quads and hips. This is the
favorite mobilization technique of powerlifter Laura Phelps Sweatt—
world champion, world record holder, and one of the greatest strength
athletes of our generation—so we commonly refer to the super couch as
the Laura Phelps.
     Note: Wrapping a band around your hip and then positioning your


                                    794
leg against the wall is tricky. Unless you have a $10,000 dollar mobility
setup, or you have a large enough box that you can position next to a
pole, you have to get a Superfriend to pull on the other end of the band,
which is not ideal. Enter the Coach Roop variation.
    Coach Roop—San Francisco CrossFit super coach—identified this
problem and came up with a solution. In Coach Roop’s iteration, you
wrap your leg up in a band, pinning your foot to your butt, so that you can
implement the super couch anywhere. All you need is two bands and a
pole. It’s genius.




        1. To set up for the super couch, hook your left leg through a
           band and create a distraction by pulling your left leg back. To
           prevent the band from pulling you forward, post up on your
           right foot and then force your knee into the corner of the box.
           With your shin flush and foot flush with the box, squeeze your

                                   795
           left glute with all your might and drive your left hip toward the
           ground.
        2. Keeping your butt squeezed and your trunk braced, very
           carefully lift your torso into the upright position.


Trailing Leg Hip Extension—Option 1
     Although the banded hip and couch series is without question the
most effective way to mobilize the anterior structures of your hip, you’re
never really biasing pure hip extension. In other words, if you’re always
mobilizing with your back leg bent, you never get to open up the hip into
full extension. The trailing leg hip extension is a simple way to remove
the flexion component so that you can get your hip into pure extension.
This is another one of those mobilizations that is only worth doing with a
band.
     Note: This mobilization can be used in conjunction with the banded
hip extension. For example, you can start in the banded hip extension
and then, after a few minutes, slide your trailing leg back and open your
banded hip into full extension.




                                    796
Hook your left leg through the band, positioning the strap around your
hip, and sprawl your left leg back. To initiate a stretch, squeeze your left
glute and drive your left hip toward the ground. From here, you can hunt
around for stiff areas by dropping your hip out to the side and exploring
side-to-side ranges. To hit deeper ranges of hip flexion, slide your lead
leg out or forward (as if you were trying to do the splits) and lower your
left hip toward the ground.


Trailing Leg Hip Extension—Option 2
    In this sequence, I demonstrate another trailing leg hip extension
option, but add an internal rotation bias by putting my lead foot up onto a
box. With your foot off the ground, you can come up onto the ball of your
back foot and rotate your knee toward the inside of your body. This

                                    797
internal rotation bias not only accounts for the stable position of your hip
(extension and internal rotation), but also takes on the shape of athletic
positions and stances (split-jerk, sprinting, combat and fighting stance).

IMPROVES:

          Hip Extension
          Hip Internal Rotation
          Top Position (Squat and Deadlift)
          Normal Posture
          Low Back and Hip Pain

METHODS:

          Contract and Relax
          Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




                                    798
1. Hook your left leg through a band, pull the strap up to your hip,
   and then step back. To protect your back, flex your left glute.
   Ideally, you want a friend to position a box in front of you after
   you step back to create tension.
2. Keeping your left hand on the box for balance and still
   squeezing your left glute, step up onto the box with your right
   foot and drive your left hip forward.


                            799
        3. Lift your torso upright, come up onto the ball of your left foot,
           and bias internal rotation of your trailing leg by rotating your
           left knee toward the inside of your body.
        4. To capture your psoas and encourage more hip extension,
           throw your left arm over your head.


Reverse Ballerina
     The reverse ballerina mobilization is an easy way to tap into hidden
stiffness upstream and downstream of your hip. As you can see from the
photos, this technique takes on the same shape as a lot of kicking
movements, making it a great mobilization piece for sports that involve
any kind of leg swing rotational elements. Think dance, martial arts, and
gymnastics.
     In addition, the reverse ballerina ties in the adductors (muscles on
the inside of your thighs). When these muscles get tight, they pull your
pelvis into a bad position in the bottom of the squat (butt wink fault see
here) and limit your capacity to drive your knees out. By throwing your
leg up onto a box, bringing your leg out to the side, and rotating away
from your leg, you still get to bias extension and internal rotation, but you
add an abduction component, which adds another level of gnarly.

IMPROVES:
          Hip Extension
          Hip Internal Rotation
          Flexion and External Rotation (Knees Out Range)

METHODS:

          Contract and Relax

                                    800
Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




                         801
1. To set up, post your right foot up on the far edge of the box.
2. Keeping your right foot open, drop your right knee and ankle to
   the box and rotate away from your right leg.
3. Driving your knee down into the box, continue to rotate away
   from your leg. This helps capture some areas in the front of
   your hip, as well as the musculature running down the inside
   of your leg.
4. You can hunt for untapped stiff areas by lowering your body
   while twisting away from your leg. You can also throw your

                            802
arm over your head, twist around, and scour for some hard-
to-reach corners.




                      803
  AREA 8
MEDIAL CHAIN
 (ADDUCTOR)




     804
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Inside of the leg and hip (adductors)

Most Commonly Used Tools:
          Roller

                                  805
Rogue Monster Band
Barbell
Bumper Plate




                     806
Test and Retest Examples:
        Bottom of the Squat
        Pulling Position
        Top Position

                              807
Adductor Smash
    The adductors—big masses of tissue on the inside of your thighs—
are like the undervalued stepchildren of your legs. They play a critical
role in the family unit, but get ignored and passed over by more
important muscles groups like your quads and hamstrings. The fact is
your adductors are responsible for stabilizing your back and pulling your
knees back to center as you rise out of a squat. They also give you
external rotation slack and stabilize your body laterally when you’re
standing on one leg (i.e. kicking, spinning, or planting).
    As I’ve said, you have to look at your body as a whole and work on
solving your mobility issues from all angles. The next time you’re
having trouble getting your knees out when you squat, don’t go straight to
your favorite kids—the quads and hamstrings—because there’s a good
chance that it’s the adductors that are limiting your position.

IMPROVES:

         Flexion External Rotation (Knee-Out Position)
         Knee Pain
         Back and Hip Pain

METHODS:

         Pressure Wave
         Contract and Relax
         Smash and Floss




                                   808
809
       1. To set up for the adductor roller smash, position the inside of
          your right leg on a roller. Keeping your right leg relaxed,
          create pressure into the roller by driving your right hip toward
          the ground.
       2. When you roll onto a tight spot, stop, get as much pressure
          into your leg as possible, and then floss around the tacked-
          down tissue by pulling your heel toward your butt.
       3. Straighten out your leg and then turn your knee toward the
          mat to create a lateral shear force across the muscle fiber.
       4. Staying on the stiff tissue, try moving your leg around in all
          directions to clear the stiffness.


Adductor Barbell Smash
    As with the quad smash, there are several different smashing
methods that you can employ. You can use a roller, a barbell, or have a
Superfriend step on the inside of your leg. Each has distinct advantages.
For example, the roller gives the freedom to smash and floss around
tacked-down tissue; the barbell allows you to isolate pockets of knotted-
up muscle using the pressure wave and contract and relax techniques;
and the Superfriend variation unglues more global stiffness than you can
hope to accomplish on your own. Note: The Superfriend variation takes
a lot of control and trust, especially if you’re a male. And you probably
should avoid making eye contact because that would be weird.




                                   810
Banded Super Frog
    The banded super frog is the most effective and consequently the
most brutal medial chain (inside of your leg and hip) mobilization in the
movement and mobility arsenal. For the longest time, I only had the
adductor smash, the super frog, and a few other mobilizations that hit the
medial chain of the high hip, adductor, inner hamstring, and groin area.
While all these techniques yielded good results, I struggled to come up
with a way to bias the hip into a good position so that I could account for
the joint capsule.
    Enter the banded super frog. By hooking your leg through a band
hanging from a pull-up bar, sliding it up to your groin, and then placing a

                                   811
bumper plate, barbell, or weight over your banded leg, you tap into the
deep regions of your hip and hit corners of your high hamstring that you
didn’t even know were there. As with so many of the great mobilizations,
this is not very comfortable. But anything that causes that level of ugly
must be good, right? The fact is this mobilization captures multiple
systems within one technique, which is always the goal. To keep your
hip in a good position and protect your back from large extension forces
(bridging the hips and hyperextending the back), keep your butt fully
engaged.
    You can also have a Superfriend step on the weight for an additional
level of gnarly-ness. Make sure you save this for after your workout or
maybe after a good warm-up because this is going to create some
serious change. Remember, you don’t want to monkey around with your
pelvic position too much before strenuous activities or heavy lifting.
    This has also been called the super sumo groin because a lot of our
big strong powerlifters have a hard time locking out while maintaining a
good hip position. The reason they have such a hard time is because this
area of the groin and pelvis is short and stiff.

IMPROVES:

         Locking Out Your Hips In The Squat
         Flexion External Rotation (Knee-Out Position)
         Normal Posture (Neutral Pelvis)

METHODS:

         Contract and Relax




                                  812
1. Hook your right leg through a (skinny) band and pull it up to
   your groin. This sets your femur into a good position within
   the hip socket, allowing you to tap into tightness at your hip
   capsule.
2. Set a 45-pound bumper plate over your right leg, pinning it to
   the ground.
3. Squeezing your right glute to support the hip joint and lower
   back, slowly lie back and bring your left foot next to your right
   foot.
4. Cover your face using your arms so nobody can see your
   grisly expression, and then lower your left knee toward the

                            813
           ground to add tension. You can contract and relax by driving
           your right knee into the weight and continue to lower and raise
           your opposite knee to control the tension.


Super Frog
    If you don’t have a band hanging from a pull-up bar, you can still
execute the super frog. Realize, however, that it won’t have the same
impact. The band adds a whole new level of gnarly and allows you to tap
into another system of restriction (hip capsule). Still, something is better
than nothing.
    Remember, you have to take a systems approach when you try to
improve position. Failing to account for any one of these pieces—motor-
control, sliding surfaces, muscle dynamics, or the joint capsule—will
always leave you a little short when it comes to optimizing or restoring
function to the movement or the tissues you’re trying to change. So if you
can use a band, do it. But please do not rip down your ceiling fan; it’s
probably not worth it.




                                    814
Sitting upright, place the sleeve of a barbell over your right thigh, pinning
your knee in place.




                                    815
Squeezing your right glute to stabilize your hip and back, lie on your right
side and position your left foot next to your right foot.




                                    816
Keeping your right hand on the barbell to keep it positioned over your
right leg, lie back and drop your left knee toward the ground to create a
greater stretch through your pelvis and medial line (groin).




For a more aggressive mobilization, you can also use a large plate.


Olympic Wall Squat
    I call this mobilization the Olympic wall squat because if you turn the
position upright, it’s like being in the sickest, deepest, most upright squat
position possible.
    To correctly execute this mobilization, get your butt as close the wall
as possible and position your feet in your squat stance. With your back
supported by the ground and the load taken off your legs, you can really
feel the areas that are restricting good mechanics. What most people
find is that their adductors are very tight, limiting their capacity to drive
their knees out in the bottom of the squat: You can really feel your feet try

                                    817
to spin out as you drive your knees out.
    Although this mobilization can easily be performed without a
distraction, wrapping a band around your back and hooking it around
your knees helps set your femur into the back of your socket, allowing
you to tap into some of the hip capsule. This compression also helps
clear impingements at the front of the hip.




                                  818
819
To begin, wrap a band around your back—holding it with your right hand
—and hook it around your left knee.




                                 820
Next, hook the band around your right knee.




                                  821
Position your butt as close to the box or wall as possible and assume
your squat stance, keeping your feet as straight as possible. From here,
you can pull down on your knees to increase hips flexion.




                                  822
To tap into you adductors and bias a more knee-out position, drive your
elbow into the inside of your knees.




                                  823
You can also spread your arms into your knees.


Happy Baby Test
    For reasons readily apparent, this is one of the mobilizations that
should be done in the privacy of your own home. What I like about this
mobilization is that it has very low stabilization demands, meaning that
you don’t really have to work that hard to get a good stretch. It’s
important to realize that it’s not as effective as some of the other
mobilization pieces, but it’s a great technique to throw in when you are
just lying around watching television.
    Another reason why I like this is because it shows you that when
there are low stabilization demands on your back, you automatically
adopt a straight foot stance. In other words, no one ever adopts a 30-

                                   824
degree turned-out position because it feels really awkward. Your feet
naturally orientate somewhere between 5 and 12 degrees, which is the
ideal squat stance.




                                 825
826
    AREA 9
POSTERIOR CHAIN
  (HAMSTRING)




      827
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Hamstrings

Most Commonly Used Tools:
         Roller

                             828
          Barbell
          Single Lacrosse Ball

Test and Retest Examples:
          Air Squat
          Bottom of the Squat
          Pulling Position




                                 829
Posterior Chain Smash and Floss
    Most athletes train their posterior chain like it’s their job. We’re
talking glutes and hamstrings here, just so you know what I mean. The
problem is they put in a ton of work to get their posterior chain strong,
and then put their muscles to sleep by sitting all day, or doing absolutely
nothing to restore some of the sliding surfaces in these tissues.
    There are three big muscles that make up your hamstring—the
semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and biceps femoris—all of which
arise from different places in your hip and then snake down on different
sides of your leg. For hamstrings to function optimally, you need full-
range in all of these tissues. In other words, you need to schedule a
smash party for your hamstrings every time you put them to work and
especially after long periods of sitting.
    If you have some down time at work, you’re stuck at the airport, or
cooling off from a workout—you get the idea—find a hard surface (a
chair or box). Then stick a lacrosse ball or softball underneath your
hamstring, get some weight over the ball, and just smash across the
tissue. As with most ball smashing techniques, if you hit a hot spot, stay
on the area while pumping your leg back and forth. It’s quick and easy,
and it’s time well spent.

IMPROVES:

          Hip Extension
          Knee Flexion
          Squat and Pulling Techniques
          Hip, Back, and Knee Pain

METHODS:

          Smash and Floss

                                    830
       Contract and Relax
       Pressure Wave




      1. Position a lacrosse ball or softball underneath your leg into
         the meat of your hamstring and distribute as much weight
         over the ball as you can handle.
      2. Hunt around for a tight spot, and then extend your leg. The
         idea is to bend and straighten your leg and move it from side
         to side.
      3. You can also pressure wave across the length of the muscle
         by shifting your weight over the ball and oscillating on and off
         bound-up pockets of knotted-up tissue.


Posterior Chain Smash and Floss: Monkey Bar of
Death Variation
  Remember sitting on top of the monkey bar structures as a kid with

                                  831
one leg draped over the bar, just kind of swinging back and forth as if it
were nothing? I’d be willing to bet that if you did this now you’d slide into
the hellish depths of the pain cave and then scramble away—or worse,
black out and plummet off the monkey bars. If you’re like the majority of
athletes, most of your hamstring stiffness resides near the insertion at
your hip, which is a difficult area to target and extremely painful area to
mobilize. Let’s face it: Nobody is going to get into your personal regions
and work around your business, or at least not as effectively as you can
do it yourself.
    Unless you’re looking to get arrested, I wouldn’t recommend
climbing on the monkey bars where kids play so you can mobilize
around your grundle region. That’s just creepy. Instead, set a barbell on
a rack at about mid-thigh level. This ends up being a much more
aggressive and effective way to break up the tissue and get large
pressure into the insertion of your hamstring. Again, the idea is to just
grind back and forth from side to side against the grain of the muscle
tissue.




        1. Set a barbell on a rack at about mid-thigh level and throw one
           of your legs over the bar, positioning the bar into your high
           hip, near the insertion of your hamstring.

                                    832
        2. When you find a piece of matted-down tissue (it shouldn’t
           take long), straighten your leg.
        3. As you bend your leg, you can shift your weight to the side,
           rolling across the length of the muscle.
        4. You can also rotate your leg from side to side, and—using
           your hands—roll the bar into your sit bones and muscle
           insertion points.


Voodoo Groin and Hamstring Wrap
    Mobilizing with a voodoo band offers a few distinct advantages: You
can mobilize in the movement or position you’re trying to change, you
address multiple systems simultaneously—joint mechanics, sliding
surface, and muscle dynamics—and you can capture tissues that are
otherwise very difficult to target. For example, smashing or getting
enough pressure into the high (proximal) hamstring and adductor area
or tapping into your groin and hip flexor region is not an easy thing to do
using conventional mobility tools like a lacrosse ball or roller.
    The fact is people spend a lot of time sitting on their high posterior
chain, turning the high hamstring, glute, and groin area into a nexus of
junky, matted-down tissue. And when the tissues around the insertion of
these muscles get tight, injury follows. As anybody that has strained his
or her groin or hamstring can attest, it’s a painful and limiting injury that
takes a long time to heal. It affects your ability to generate force and
causes a ton of funky movement and tissue adaptations. To make
matters worse, it’s very difficult to get in there and break up the knotted-
up scar tissue that starts to form post injury. This is why voodoo flossing
is so great. You get a circumferential compression around those hard-
to-reach areas. Add some full-range movement into the equation and
you have a model for dealing with the scar balls (which restrict and

                                    833
compromise movement) and restoring sliding surfaces to matted-down
tissues.




                               834
835
Dynamic leg swings are a great way to safely restore sliding surfaces to
the high hamstring and groin region. Keep your knee straight, foot
neutral, and swing your leg out in front of you as if you were punting a
football.


Posterior Chain Floss
    If you’re a full grown adult, you’re not going to magically grow new
hamstrings. To lengthen these muscles, you need to restore shortened
and tight tissue back to their ideal ranges. The bottom line is that
stretching is not going to do anything to restore normal range to those
steel cables running down the back of your legs. If you want to make
lasting change, you have to take a systems approach. You have to clear
sliding surface dysfunction with some qualitative and aggressive

                                  836
smashing, as well as incorporate end-range mobilization to lengthen the
tissue.
    One of the key concepts of my Movement and Mobility System is to
mobilize tissues into ideal positions, and then use them so that the
musculature gets appropriately stimulated for normal range
development. To be blatant, the best way to lengthen your hamstrings is
to use them in a functional setting. The posterior chain mobilization is a
perfect example of a weight-bearing exercise that takes on a very
similar shape to something that you’ll actually do (deadlift, pick
something off the ground). As you can see, you have a few different
options. You can post your hands on the ground or a box and floss by
bending and flexing your knee (option 1 and 2) or hinge forward from
your hip (option 3). Whether you use one or a combination of all, these
options provide a fantastic pre-game, pre-workout mobilization that will
help restore normal range-of-motion to your hamstrings and hips.

IMPROVES:

         Hamstring Range-of-Motion
         Hip Extension (Top Position)
         Knee Flexion
         Squat and Pulling Techniques
         Hip, Back, and Knee Pain

METHOD:

         Floss


Option 1

                                   837
Fold forward from your hips—keeping your belly tight and back flat—
and plant your hands on the ground. If you can’t reach the ground without
rounding your back, position a box or bench in front of you.




                                  838
Wrap a band around your hip and walk forward to create tension. For
this particular option, it helps if your banded leg is positioned slightly in
front of your free leg.




                                     839
Straighten your leg and drive your hips back.




                                  840
Still keeping your back as flat as possible, bend your knee.




                                   841
Keeping your weight on your heel, continue to floss by extending and
flexing your knee. The idea is to put in twenty to fifty knee bends. To
capture your high hip (glute region), you can also rotate your hips
slightly as you lockout your leg and walk your upper body around your
planted foot in either direction.


Option 2


                                   842
Hook your leg through a band, pull it up to your hip, and then walk
forward to create tension.



                                   843
Keeping your belly tight, back flat, and leg straight, hinge forward from
your hips until you reach your end-range.




                                    844
Pull yourself back to the upright position. From here, you can continue to
bend forward and floss in and out of end-range hip flexion. The idea is to
keep your spine rigid, your knee locked out, and your weight centered

                                   845
over your heel.


Option 3
    Remember, to effect true change, you have to hit your hamstrings
from different angles. That means changing your position so that you
hunt out hard-to-reach corners of tight muscle. By putting your leg onto a
box, you get your leg into a flexed position (think squatting), which
allows you to tap into the high hip and hamstring region that is difficult to
get.




        1. Wrap a band around your hip and plant your foot on a box. Try
           to keep your foot flat to the box. You’ll probably feel a good
           stretch in this position so feel free to scour around for tight
           corners in this position.
        2. Straighten your leg and shoot your hips back. To really
           capture your high hip region, keep your foot flat on the box
           until your reach end-range and then allow the ball of your foot
           to come up as you lockout your knee.
        3. Slowly bend your knee and shift your weight forward. From

                                    846
           here, you can continue to floss by bending and flexing your
           knee.


Banded Classic Posterior Chain Mob
     As you know, I’m a big fan of mobilizing in positions that reflect the
realities of life and sport. For example, I prefer to mobilize my
hamstrings from the standing position because it has a weight-bearing
element that reflects the movements that I use in my day-to-day training,
like deadlifting. More importantly, it seems to yield better results.
However, that is not to say that you can’t apply this same method while
lying on your back. In fact, this classic approach has real value,
especially for our Jiu-Jitsu leopards or MMA fighters who utilize this
range while lying on their back, fighting from their guard.
     What’s great about this option is there’s no weight-bearing element
on your spine—so you don’t have to work as hard to keep your back in a
good position. The key is to approach the stretch just as you would when
setting up for a deadlift: Load your hip into flexion and then apply tension
at your knee by straightening your leg. As I’ve mentioned, this allows
you to capture the tight corners of your hip and high hamstring, which is
where most people are tight. If you straighten your leg first and use your
whole leg as a tensioner, which is very common, you tend to lose some
of the effectiveness.
     Another key aspect with this mobilization is to add a posterior
distraction. As with the previously demonstrated techniques, this clears
impingements at the front of your hip and helps tie in the musculature of
your high hamstring. You can do this one of two ways. The first is to
distract from a pole. This allows you to put a lot of tension into the band,
offering a really aggressive distraction. The problem is hooking a band
around a pole isn’t always a viable option. The second option addresses
this issue. To set yourself up, loop a band around your foot a couple of

                                    847
times, hook it around your hip, and then use your banded foot to create a
posterior distraction—see photos on the next page. This not only allows
you to mobilize with your hip in a good position, but also allows you to
control the tension with your banded foot. Plus, you can execute this in
the comfort of your living room or office.




Loop a band around the center of your left foot (if it’s a thin band you may
need to wrap it a few times), hook it around your right hip, and then pull
your knee to your chest. Try to keep your left leg straight. By adding this
posterior distraction, you pull your femur to the bottom of the capsule,
which will clear any impingement you may have at the front of your hip.
It also allows you to tie in the musculature of your high hamstring.




                                    848
With your hip loaded into a flexed position, wrap your left hand around
the back of your right knee, sit up, and grab the back of your right ankle.




                                    849
Grab the back of your ankle with both of your hands.




                                  850
Next, apply tension by straightening your knee. From here, you can
continue to floss by bending and straightening your leg, contract and
relax by resisting into your arms, and scour around for tight corners by
manipulating your leg to either side of your body.

    If you can’t reach your foot because you’re missing hamstring range-
of-motion, wrapping a band or rope around your foot is certainly a valid
idea. In other words, don’t flex into a weird position just to grab your foot.
That goes against everything I’ve been trying to teach you. This is also a
good option if you’re sweaty from a workout or your grip is blown,
making it difficult to grip your calve.
    The key: Keep your foot in a neutral position by hooking the band
around the center of your foot. A lot of people mistakenly wrap it around
their toes and pull their foot into flexion, creating a big stretch at the back
of their knee.




Super P-LATIES
   As I mentioned, I prefer weight bearing mobilization techniques


                                     851
because they’re a closer correlate to what we’re trying to change. That
said, you need options. And what works for some doesn’t necessarily
work for others. In any case, you can still make a positive impact on
your posterior chain musculature using mobilizations like the one
demonstrated below. This is a great pre-game, pre-workout option that
doesn’t put a lot of structural demand on your body. By moving your leg
through a full range-of-motion under tension, you can relieve some
muscle stiffness as well as prep your hamstrings for any kind sport
activity.




Load your hip into flexion, hook a band around the center of your foot
(arch), and then straighten your leg. Note: Make sure you wear shoes
when doing this mobilization.



                                  852
Keeping your foot slightly pointed and your knee locked out, drive your
heel toward the ground. To avoid breaking into an overextended position,
keep your abs braced and your lower back flush with the ground.




Lower your leg until your heel makes contact with the ground.

                                  853
Slowly, pull your leg into end-range flexion.


Banded Distraction
    Adding a posterior distraction to this mobilization is tricky, but if you
can pull it off, I encourage you to do it. The key is to keep your hands on
the band so it doesn’t snap off your leg.




                                     854
855
856
AREA 10
 KNEE




  857
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Knee and surrounding musculature

Most Commonly Used Tools:
         Single Lacrosse Ball

                                858
         Voodoo Band
         Rogue Monster Band

Test and Retest Examples:
         Bottom of the Squat
         Terminal Knee Extension Test




                              859
Terminal Knee Extension (Knee Tweak Fix)
     When I evaluate athletes for knee pain, one of the first things that I
check is terminal knee extension. What I’m looking for is whether or not
they have full knee range-of-motion.
     An easy way to test this is to sit with your legs out in front of you and
then extend one of your knees by flexing your quad. If you have full knee
range-of-motion, your heel will lift up off the ground and you will see a
little bit of hyperextension at the knee joint. If you have a slight bend in
the knee or you can’t lockout the joint, it’s a good indication that you’re
missing the capacity to achieve terminal knee extension.




                                     860
     When your knees are stuck in a bent or flexed position, they are
under constant tension while standing. It’s the equivalent of not being
able to extend your arm and then doing a handstand. Add 10,000 steps a
day and heavily loaded movements into the equation and you have the
smoking gun for knee pain and lost potential. In addition, every
movement starts in a pre-loaded, biomechanically-compromised
position.
     Consider driving your knees forward as you initiate the squat. It’s
impossible to unload that tension once you’ve entered the tunnel. It
doesn’t matter how much tension you have in your hips and hamstrings
in this situation, your knees will remain fully loaded. This is why driving
your knees forward when you squat, or bringing your elbows back when
you bench press, dip, or do pushups, is a faulty mechanic. These
secondary joints are not designed to handle the load. This is a job for the
primary engines of your hips and shoulders. You will continuously load
your knee and quad instead of your hips and hamstrings every time you
hinge from your hips, placing an insane amount of strain on your knee,
quad, quad ligament, patellar tendon, and more.
     To restore function and normal range-of-motion to the joint, you need
to pull the joint surfaces apart so that you can reset your knee into a good
position. When athletes are missing knee extension, in most cases their
knee is unlocked and twisted inside the knee structure. Put simply,
there’s a kink in the joint that prevents them from opening up their knee.
This often stems from a knee fault or knee tweak of some kind. It’s like a
door that doesn’t swing correctly or open all the way because one of the
hinges has a twist in it.
     To realign the joint, the first thing you need to do is create some
space within the knee joint, which is accomplished by applying a
distraction at the ankle. Next, grab your shin and internally rotate your
lower leg bone, the tibia. This will realign your knee into an idealized
position. To restore extension range, apply downward pressure and flex
your quad.

                                    861
IMPROVES:
      Terminal Knee Extension
      Knee Pain

METHODS:

      Band Distraction
      Voodoo Band




                            862
863
        1. Hook a band around the top of your foot and then wrap it
           around the base of your heel. Once that’s done, create tension
           in the band and prop your foot onto a foam roller.
        2. Grab above your knee and press down. You’re not trying to
           break your knee in half. Apply just enough pressure to
           achieve full extension and hold it in position for a couple of
           seconds. If you still can’t lockout your knee, grab your shin,
           internally rotate your tibia, and then apply downward pressure
           in the same manner. Repeat this process until you restore
           normal function to the joint or experience some kind of
           positive change.


Voodoo Variation
     If possible, wrap a voodoo band around your entire knee (a couple
inches below and a few inches above) before executing this
mobilization. This will not only help reset the joint in a good position, but
the compression forces will create a gapping effect. This gives you a
little bit more breathing room within your knee structure, which allows
you to press and rotate your knee into newly challenged ranges. Anytime
you can use a distraction in conjunction with compression, it is a win.




                                    864
865
Grab your shin, internally rotate your tibia, and then apply downward
pressure, encouraging your knee into full extension. Having a
Superfriend facilitate this motion is ideal.


Gap and Smash
    If you have knee pain, think this: “I need to mobilize the tissues
surrounding my knee joint.” Then get to work.
    The gap and smash mobilization is a fast way to hit the areas just
behind your knee where your hamstring and calf cross the joint. It’s kind
of a two-for-one because you hit upstream and downstream of the knee
with a single mobilization.
    This is also a great technique for addressing tight calves. Most
people spend tons of time working on their calves at the ankle level.
What they forget is the calf crosses two joints, the ankle and the knee.
By getting into the high gastrocnemius, you can effectively deal with
these tight tissues and feed slack to your knee and ankle.
    The idea is to sandwich a ball behind your knee—either on the inside
or outside—creating a large compression force. From there you can
implement one of two strategies. You can floss around by moving your
foot in all directions, pulling on your shin with both of your hands; or you
can plant your foot on the ground and scoot your butt into your leg. The
key is to work the inside and outside of the knee, smashing both sides of
the gastroc.

IMPROVES:

          Terminal Knee Extension
          Knee Pain
          Tight Calves


                                    866
      Ankle Range-of-Motion

METHODS:
      Smash and Floss
      Contract and Relax


Inside Line




     1. Place a lacrosse ball behind your knee on the inside of your
        leg.
     2. With the ball in place, curl your heel toward your butt and pull
        your leg tight using both of your hands. This creates a large
        compression force that targets your lower hamstring and

                                867
        upper calf.
     3. Still pulling on your shin with both of your hands, start moving
        your foot around in every direction.
     4. To increase pressure, plant your foot on the ground and scoot
        your butt toward your heel.


Outside Line




                                868
Position a lacrosse ball behind your knee on the outside of your leg.




                                   869
Curl your heel toward your butt, cup your hands around your shin, and
pull your leg in tight to your body, sandwiching the ball behind your knee.




                                   870
Pulling on your shin to create a large compression force, start moving
your foot around in every direction. Tacking down the tissues of your
distal hamstring and upper calf will help restore suppleness to the tight
tissues that cross the knee.




                                   871
To increase pressure, plant your foot on the ground and scoot your butt
toward your heel.


Flexion Gapping
    When I teach seminars and work with athletes, I encourage people to
think about treating the issues in and around the area that is giving them

                                   872
trouble. You don’t need a background in anatomy to address your
business. For example, if you’re having knee problems, it’s conceivable
that one of the structures around the knee is tight or not working
correctly. When people have arthritic knees or a really stiff joint for
example, hinge dust starts to accumulate below the knee. Flexion
gapping is a simple way to blow away that hinge dust and restore
normal function to the joint.
    A simple way to screen for knee flexion problems is to sit butt to
ankles. You should be able to smash your calves into your hamstrings
without pain or restriction. If you’re unable to achieve this range, it could
be quad stiffness, poor ankle range-of-motion, or a stiff knee capsule.
This technique is an easy way to deal with the latter issue. If the joint
capsule is restricted, achieving full hip or knee flexion is difficult
because there is not enough space in the front of the knee to
accommodate for the rotation of the femur on the tibia. Like the banded
distraction iterations, this is an easy way to restore that passive
accessory motion and restore normal range-of-motion to the knee.

IMPROVES:
          Knee Extension
          Knee Pain




                                    873
1-4 Roll up a small towel and place it behind your knee.
5-6 Grab your shin, pull your heel toward your butt, and then scoot your
    butt towards your foot, creating as much pressure as possible. Try
    to keep the foot straight while oscillating in and out of peak
    compression.




                                  874
        AREA 11
MEDIAL AND ANTERIOR SHIN




           875
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Inside and outside areas of the shin, from your knee down to
          your ankle

Most Commonly Used Tools:

                                  876
          Single Lacrosse Ball

Test and Retest Examples:
         Bottom of the Squat (Pistol)
         Dorsiflexion and Extension




                                 877
Medial Shin Smash and Floss
    If you run a lot, or you’re on your feet all day, there is a good chance
that the tissues of your lower leg are brutally tight and in need of some
serious love. The musculature extending from your knee to your ankle
on the inside of your shin—specifically the soleus, posterior tibialis, and
gastrocnemius muscle—is responsible for giving your foot arch support.
Anytime you stand, walk, or run you are putting demand on these
tissues. As the calf musculature becomes tight and locked up, people
start defaulting to an open foot position. This causes the ankle to collapse
and places stress on the upstream tissues.
    To restore good positions and normalize those tissues, take a ball
and smash it into the inside of your shinbone. Work from the base of the
knee down to the anklebone. The idea is to create large pressures and
work all the elements. You can pressure wave, contract and relax, and
smash and floss by moving the foot through various ranges. People will
find areas of high pain and areas of low pain. The key is to skip over the
low pain and stay on the hot, grody areas behind the shin.
    This mobilization should be your first stop if you have plantar fascia
problems, posterior tibialis tendonitis, if you can’t get your foot into a
good arch, or if you’re someone who does a lot of running—especially
Pose-centric running.

IMPROVES:

          Neutral and Straight Foot Position
          Foot and Ankle Problems
          Knee Pain

METHODS:

          Contract and Relax

                                    878
         Smash and Floss
         Pressure Wave




The target area stretches from the base of the knee down to right above
the anklebone along the inside of the shin.


Medial Shin Tack and Floss—Option 1
   There are a few different ways to approach this mobilization.
Personally, I like to sit on the ground with my legs crossed, but not
everyone can comfortably get into this position. If you are physically
restricted, you can cross your leg over your knee from the sitting
position (Option 2) or implement the double lacrosse ball variation
(Option 3).


                                   879
        1. Pin a lacrosse ball on the inside of your shin and apply
           downward pressure using both of your hands.
        2. Once you find a hot spot, tack the tissue down and move your
           foot around in all directions. You can also apply a pressure
           wave or implement the contract and relax technique.


Executive Medial Shin Tack and Floss—Option 2
     This is a fantastic option for the less flexible. It also serves as a
perfect lower body maintenance strategy for the desk-bound athlete. It’s
a win any time you can work on improving your position and mobilizing
stiff tissues while trapped at work or in a chair. It’s kind of like you’re
getting paid to mobilize.




                                    880
881
Cross your leg over your knee, wedge a lacrosse ball between your
shinbone and calf, and apply downward pressure with both hands. From
there, you can contract and relax, roll your foot around in different
directions, or apply the pressure wave technique.

Double Lacrosse Ball Medial Shin Smash and
Floss—Option 3
     This option is attractive because it’s easy to get into the position, plus
it allows you to target both sides of your leg. If you’re an endurance
athlete with tacked-down tissues, or you have foot pain or a weird ankle
pain, consider this a gold star technique.




                                     882
883
        1. Position a lacrosse ball on the bottom and top of your leg.
        2. Align the top ball over the bottom (on a tight area) and apply
           downward pressure using both of your hands.


Lateral and Anterior Compartment Smash
    If you have foot problems or strange downstream pain, you have to
look at the shin and calf. All of the tissues that run and control your feet
are housed in your lower leg. The calf and shin are the master of
puppets pulling the strings to your feet.
    The problem is people tend to forget about the front of the shin
because all the meat is on the back of the leg, which is where most
people focus their attention. However, if an athlete does a lot of running,
walking, and standing—especially if he heel strikes and stands with his
feet turned out—those peroneal muscles that run down the outside of the
lower leg are on constant tension and will get extremely tight. This is
precisely how people get shin splints.
    When I treat athletes who have shin splints, I’ll ask them, “What are
you doing for those tissues?” They’ll pause, think about it for a second,
then say, “Nothing.” It’s odd because those tissues are stiff and being
pulled off the bone, but more often than not the athlete isn’t addressing
the area of localized pain. Obviously, working upstream and
downstream of the problem is part of the conversation, but to restore
those tissues to their normal function, the athlete has to get in there and
give those stiff tissues some love.
    It’s important to realize that when this anterior compartment of the
shin gets tight, the muscles don’t contract very well, limiting dorsiflexion
range-of-motion. It also inhibits your ability to point your toes. For this
reason, the test and retest is to simply flex and point your foot back and
forth. If your shin is working efficiently and the sliding surfaces are
actually sliding, you will be able to pull and point your toes farther with

                                    884
less discomfort.
    If you have strange knee or ankle pain, you’re struggling to get your
foot into a good position, or the front of your shins hurt—meaning that
you have shin splints—this mobilization should be at the top of your list.
Know that there are a couple different ways you can attack these tissues.
You can use a rolling pin or stick massager, or you can pressure your
weight over a lacrosse ball or roller as demonstrated here. The tools
that you use are not important as long as you can get the job done.

IMPROVES:
         Neutral and Straight Foot Position
         Anterior Compartment Pain (Shin Splints)
         Knee and Ankle Pain

METHODS:
         Smash and Floss
         Pressure Wave
         Contract and Relax




                                   885
The goal is to work the anterior compartment and the lateral
compartment (the peroneals) along the front of your shins and outside of
your leg from your knee to your ankle.




                                  886
1. Kneel on the ground and position a lacrosse ball to the outside
   of your shin. To add more pressure, you can sit your butt
   back, or reposition your center of mass over the ball.

                           887
        2. Work across the tissue, pressure waving from the outside to
           the inside of your leg. If you stumble across a painful spot,
           stop and move your foot around in all directions. You can also
           contract and relax to penetrate deeper into the tight tissues.


Roller Variation
    You can also use a foam roller—ideally a Rumble Roller. Work up
and down the length of the tissue hunting out tight areas. When you find a
hot spot, rock back and forth from side to side across the tissue while
moving your foot around in every direction.




Global Plantar Flexion
   This is a sweet and simple global dorsiflexion mobilization and a
low-budget way to stretch the front of your shins. It’s a powerful counter
mobilization to the previous technique that puts the anterior
compartment into an end-range position. You can stretch both legs at a
time as demonstrated here or stretch one leg at a time by posting up on
your foot.

                                   888
1. Kneel on the ground with the tops of your feet flush with the
   ground, positioning your big toes right next to each other.
   Note: If you want to isolate one leg, plant one foot on the
   ground. For example, if you want to stretch your right shin,
   you would post up on your left foot and plant your right hand
   on the mat to counterbalance your weight.
2. Keeping your back flat and knees straight, lean back and
   allow your knees to come up off the ground.




                           889
AREA 12
 CALF




  890
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Back of lower leg, from your knee down to your Achilles
          tendon

Most Commonly Used Tools:

                                 891
          Single Lacrosse Ball
          Barbell
          Roller

Test and Retest Examples:
         Bottom of the Squat (Pistol)
         Dorsiflexion and Extension




                                 892
Calf Smash
     Calf muscles have a serious job. An athletic person takes an
average of ten thousand steps per day while walking. That is 5,000 loads
per calf over the course of a single day, and 70,000 over the course of a
week. This doesn’t even include going up and down stairs, running,
working out, and playing sports. If you have bad foot positioning, whether
you’re walking with your feet turned out or wearing shoes that
compromise position, the insidious calf tightness that accumulates is
insane. It’s no accident that people’s calves are in a state of constant
stiffness and their heel cords are like a couple of steel cables.
     If you’re missing ankle range-of-motion, you have no choice but to
compensate into an open foot position. This means that you stand, walk,
run, and move with an open knee and collapsed ankle. When this
happens, you can’t expect everything to be okay. It’s the same issue
when people are missing wrist extension; they turn their hands out and
wonder why their shoulders hurt. If you’re missing foot extension or
dorsiflexion, you’re going to turn your foot out to solve that range-of-
motion problem and buffer the issue. Do this and ultimately say hello to
bone spurs, Achilles tendonitis, Achilles ruptures, and a slate of other
ankle problems. You can avoid all of this if you have full ankle range-of-
motion and understand good positioning. You have to make sure that the
large drivers of your ankles are full range and supple.
     Although the chief problem is usually in the heel cords, the tightness
transmits upstream. The gastroc, which is a powerful lower-leg muscle
that makes up your calf, is responsible for controlling your ankle. If those
tissues get stiff, ankle and knee pain generally follow.
     What you have to remember is that you have a lot of musculature
controlling your feet, and all that tissue is running through a very small
space. This is why you need to prioritize some of the smashing effects
as a first step when you’re trying to deal with knee pain or trying to
improve ankle range-of-motion. You can’t just roll aimlessly around on a

                                    893
foam roller. You must smash.
    There are several smashing techniques that you can incorporate,
ranging from the horribly painful to the mildly uncomfortable. Depending
on your level of stiffness and pain tolerance, you may have to start with
the most basic, which is the roller calf smash, and work your way up.
Just remember, the more uncomfortable the mobilization, the more
change you will see, feel, and realize.

IMPROVES:

         Neutral and Straight Foot Position
         Ankle Range-of-Motion
         Ankle and Knee Pain
         Calf Tightness

METHODS:

         Contract and Relax
         Pressure Wave
         Smash and Floss


Roller Calf Smash
    This is the most basic calf-smashing technique that we use. It’s
usually reserved for athletes that are extremely sore. As you know, tight
calves are very sensitive, making it tough to mobilize without passing
out or vomiting on yourself. This is why it’s good to have low-level
mobilizations that you can throw in as a warm-up to the more
aggressive techniques. Remember, in order to make observable and
measurable change, you need large acute pressures, which is difficult to

                                  894
get using a foam roller or pipe.
     To execute this technique, position your calf and heel cord on a roller
or pipe, cross your opposite leg over your shin to add pressure, and then
roll your leg from side to side. You can also contract and relax and point
and flex your toes.




Weighted Calf Smash
   Placing a heavy sandbag over your shin to add additional
compression force is another good option. Although having a Superfriend
apply pressure to your leg or doing the bone saw calf smash yourself
(see coming techniques) are more effective, this one is certainly valid.




                                    895
Superfriend Calf Smash
     The Superfriend calf smash is great for two reasons: You can get a
ton of pressure into your calf, and you are more likely to tolerate higher
compression forces than you ever would on your own. The bottom line
is there are not too many people out there who will apply the same kind
of tortuous pressure as a Superfriend.
     Have your training partner apply downward pressure and slowly roll
your leg from side to side, clearing one section of tissue at a time. As
with the Superfriend quad smash, you probably need to agree on a “safe”
word that will cue your partner to ease up.



                                   896
897
Barbell Calf Smash
    The barbell calf smash offers more acute pressure, which is what
you want when dealing with tight heel cords because it allows you to
restore superficial sliding surfaces to the tissues near the base of your
heel and ankle. You can roll your foot from side to side or twist the
barbell up your lower leg to get a pressure wave effect. Crossing your
opposite leg over your foot and leaning forward is a great way to add
more compression force.




                                   898
899
Bone Saw Calf Smash
    This is my favorite calf smash mobilization and the first one I use
when I have calf and heel cord tightness or ankle or knee related issues.
But I’m not going to lie: It’s pretty nasty.
    By placing your instep over a foam roller and positioning your shin
over your leg, you can get large pressures working through the back of
your calf. The idea is to slice the blade of your shin into the areas that
are tight, oscillating from side to side, as if you were playing a fiddle.
What’s great about this technique is that your foot is off the ground, so
you can mobilize with a relaxed leg, allowing you to smash and floss
tight areas. The contract and relax technique also works here.
    It’s important to note that you can control the pressure by adjusting
your weight. Sitting your weight back will increase compression, while
shifting forward will take pressure off your leg.




Kneel and place your instep over a foam roller, keeping your foot neutral.




                                   900
Using your arms to support the weight of your upper body, bring your
opposite leg up and place your shin or instep across the tissue you’re
trying to change.




To add a compression force, sit your butt back and shift your weight
over your top leg. Note: You can control the amount of pressure by
shifting your weight forward and backward. The more you sit back, the
more aggressive the pressure.




                                  901
Keeping your weight centered over your leg, slowly smash your shin
across the back of your calf. The idea is to shear back and forth across
the back of your calf. You can also hang out on a tight spot and apply the
contract and relax and smash and floss techniques.


Voodoo Calf Mobilization
    If you had to consume a human being (not that you ever would), the
calf muscle would be one of the worst pieces to eat. It is so thick and
fibrous that you would have to literally boil it for eight hours to break
down the grisly muscle tissue. As I said, your calf undergoes an intense
number of loading cycles: Walking, playing sports, lifting, wearing high
heels, and running all add up. Not to mention that most people spend
very little time undoing all that insidious, accumulated stiffness.
    The bottom line is this: Your calf is prone to sliding surface
restrictions. Left untreated, that stiffness aggregates into intramuscular
adhesions and knotted-up scar balls that compromise mechanics and
increase potential for injury.


                                   902
Wrap a band around the area that you are trying to change and then
move your foot through as much flexion and extension range as


                                 903
possible.


Classic Calf Mobilization
    When people have tight calves, generally their first thought is to just
throw their foot on a wall or curb. It’s a classic approach that you can do
anywhere, anytime, and with zero equipment aside from shoes. (The
shoe helps support your foot and provides traction on the wall so that you
can keep the ball of your foot in place). However, there are a couple of
problems worth noting with this kind of classic calf stretch.
    The first problem is that it’s difficult to change tissues by simply
hanging out in a static position. These muscles are very, very strong and
can handle large loads for extended periods of time. It’s like hanging on a
piece of steel cable hoping that it will stretch.
    The second issue is it doesn’t take a systems approach. That is,
you’re only addressing muscle dynamics and not your ankle capsule or
sliding surfaces. You are putting yourself into a physiologic range and
then hoping that you can get enough pressure to make change. For these
reasons, it’s imperative that you prioritize the previous mobilizations
and, if possible, attach a band around your ankle to tie in the joint
capsule.
    What is great about this classic mobilization is that it challenges
your heel cord and calf at full range and serves as an excellent
supplement or counter mobilization of the previous techniques. You can
also focus on the tissues at the base of your heel by bending your knee
and loading the soleus complex. Just be sure to keep your foot in a good
position and maintain a good arch as you hunt around for tight areas.




                                   904
1. Standing a few feet away from a wall, lower into a quarter or
   half squat and place the ball of your foot as high up on the wall
   as possible—keeping your heel in contact with the ground,
   your foot neutral, and your glute squeezed. Sometimes it’s
   easier to start high up on the wall and slide your foot down
   until your heel touches down. Once your foot is in position,
   straighten your knee. Don’t try to bend your foot.
2. Keeping your foot pinned in place, stand tall and drive your
   weight toward the wall or pole. With your leg straight,
   mobilize both your heel cord and calf (gastroc). Remember
   to keep your glute engaged and your belly tight as you move
   your hip toward the wall.
3. To explore different ranges of stiffness, lower your elevation
   by bending your leg and scour around for tight areas by
   externally and internally rotating your knee.



                            905
Banded Distraction
    It’s a bit tricky, but if you can rig a band and apply a posterior
distraction, you will increase the effectiveness of this mobilization
twofold. Any time you take a classic stretch and apply a distraction to tie
in the joint capsule, you turn a good stretch into a great stretch.




                                   906
907
Banded Heel Cord: Anterior Bias
    A lot of people report an impingement at the front of their ankle when
they perform a classic calf stretch or pull their toes toward their knee.
This is the equivalent of an anterior hip impingement. When your femur
is resting at the front of your hip socket (usually from too much sitting), it
runs into your acetabulum during deep flexion-based movements like
squatting. It’s the same idea here, but in this situation the bones of your
ankle are resting at the front of your joint capsule, causing that familiar
pinch at the front of the socket. As with the banded hip distraction, this is
a simple way to clear that impingement and restore normal function and
range-of-motion to the joint.
    For the best results, create as much posterior tension as you can
handle, drive your knee forward and out to the side—keeping your entire
foot in contact with the ground—and oscillate in and out of end-range
until you experience some kind of change.

IMPROVES:
          Neutral Foot Position
          Clears Anterior Ankle Impingement
          Ankle Pain
          Increases Ankle Range-of-Motion

METHODS:

          Paper-clipping (Oscillation)




                                     908
        1. Hook a band around the front of your ankle at the base of your
           foot and create as much tension in the band as possible. You
           want your entire foot in contact with the ground and your foot
           straight. This allows you to generate a little bit of external
           rotation force to stabilize your ankle in a good position.
        2. Drive your knee forward. The idea is to oscillate in and out of
           end-range until you experience some kind of positive change.
        3. You can also prop the ball of your foot onto a weight to
           challenge more end-range dorsiflexion.


Banded Heel Cord: Posterior Bias
    The banded heel cord will tack-down the tight tissues at the base of
your heel and restore sliding surfaces to the area. If this region gets tight,
the skin will literally adhere to the underlying tendon. This restricts

                                     909
range-of-motion and causes an onslaught of other problems. This is a
simple yet cogent way to unglue that matted-down tissue and help
restore normal range-of-motion to your ankle.




                                 910
Hook a band around the base of your heel and create as much tension in
the band as possible. Keeping your entire foot in contact with the ground,

                                   911
drive your knee forward and toward the outside of your body, oscillating
in and out of end-range. The idea is to maintain a slight external rotation
force to prevent your ankle from collapsing inward.




                                    912
        AREA 13
ANKLE AND PLANTAR SURFACE




           913
Mobilization Target Areas:
          Ankle, heel cord, and the bottom of your foot (forefoot)

Most Commonly Used Tools:
           Single Lacrosse Ball

                                   914
Test and Retest Examples:
         Bottom of the Squat
         Dorsiflexion and Extension



                               915
Ball Whack
    When I see someone in my physical therapy practice that is missing
ankle range-of-motion, this is the first technique I use. It’s cheap, easy,
fast, and yields freakishly good results. The best part is you don’t need a
Ph.D. in anatomy to figure out where your skin slides over your bones.
Bend your knee. Does your skin slide smoothly over the iliotibial (IT)
band? Flex your elbow. Does your skin slide over your elbow without
restriction? Flex your foot. Does your skin slide over your anklebones
and tendons? If it doesn’t, you should immediately recognize that as a
problem and work on restoring sliding surfaces to that tacked-down
skin. To use the ball whack to restore sliding surfaces to the skin over
the bony prominence and tendons of your foot, pin a ball on the inside
and outside of your anklebone and around the areas of the heel cord and
give it a firm whack. This momentarily stretches the skin, peeling it off
the underlying surfaces.
    Although you can do this mobilization on your own, it’s difficult to
generate sufficient force. For this reason, I advocate employing the help
of a Superfriend.
    Note: This technique can be applied anywhere you have skin
stretched over a body structure—specifically your elbow or the IT-Band
at your knee.

IMPROVES:

         Sliding Surface Dysfunction
         Ankle Range-of-Motion
         Ankle Pain

Inside Ankle


                                   916
Heel Cord




            917
Outside Ankle




1-6 Pin the ball on an area of tacked-down tissue—focusing your
    attention on the anklebone, heel cord, and surrounding areas—and
    then give the ball a firm smack. You can also try applying pressure
    with the ball and then rapidly pushing it. Don’t just limit yourself to
    one direction, either. To restore sliding surfaces, you need to hit or
    push the ball in every direction. Do this until the skin starts to slide
    smoothly over the underlying surfaces. It doesn’t take too many
    whacks to do that.


Voodoo Ankle Mobilization
     Voodoo wrapping your ankle is one of the most effective ways to
restore sliding surfaces to your heel cord, ankle, and forefoot. As I
mentioned before, you can approach this mobilization from a couple of
different angles. If you’re treating a swollen (sprained) ankle, start near

                                    918
the toes and cover the entire foot, keeping about 50 percent tension in the
band. If you’re dealing with sliding surface dysfunction and trying to
improve ankle range-of-motion, you don’t necessarily have to wrap your
entire foot. Instead, just focus your attention on restricted areas, which
for most people is around the ankle and heel cord. The key is to keep
around 75 percent tension in the band and force your foot through a full
range-of-motion. You can do this by propping your foot onto a bumper
plate, implementing one of the calf stretching techniques, or by simply
hanging out in the bottom of the squat.




1-4 Whether you’re trying to clear inflammation or restore sliding
    surfaces, start on the forefoot and wrap up the leg. Keep about a half
    inch (or half of the band) overlap and cover all the restricted areas
    of the foot.




                                   919
1-2 Move your ankle through as much range-of-motion as possible.
    You can implement the previous calf mobilization techniques (the
    banded heel cored is a great option), or prop your foot on an
    elevated surface like a bumper plate. An even better option is to
    perform the movement you’re trying to change (run, squat, etc.).


Plantar Surface Smash
    This is a great mobilization for the common and dreaded foot
disease plantar fasciitis. Although there are other mechanisms that can
trigger plantar surface problems—posterior tibialis, caught nerve
endings, etc.—plantar fasciitis is the catchall term used to describe any

                                   920
kind of pain on the bottom of the foot. The people most susceptible to
plantar fascia issues are modern athletes, especially those who
gravitate toward barefoot and Pose-centric running practices, and people
who move with their feet turned out and stand with their arches
collapsed.
    The plantar fascia is a big sheet of connective tissue that runs along
the bottom of your foot, from the ball of your foot to your heel. As
anybody who has had plantar fascia problems can attest, when this area
gets inflamed or stiff, it causes a ton of pain and discomfort.
    One of the best ways to resolve pain and restore suppleness to the
plantar surfaces is to roll your foot over a lacrosse ball. The idea is to
put in some qualitative smashing by slowly pressure waving up and
down the length of your plantar fascia. You can also think about
strumming the musculature of your feet by moving from side to side. If
you hit a hot spot, stay on it, contract and relax, and pressure wave into
the ropey tissue. You can do this while you’re at work sitting at your
desk, or you can stand up and get some pressure into your foot. Either
way, don’t wait until your foot hurts to address the issue. Fix your foot
position and make sure your skin slides and glides over your plantar
fascia and that the bottom of your foot is supple.

IMPROVES:
         Foot Pain (Plantar Fasciitis)
         Ankle and Foot Range-of-Motion

METHODS:
         Pressure Wave
         Contract and Relax



                                   921
The mobilization target area encompasses the plantar surfaces of the
bottom of your foot, from the ball of your foot to your heel.




                                 922
1-3 Step on a lacrosse ball, positioning it anywhere on your plantar
    surface, and apply as much pressure as you can handle. You can
    contract and relax on stiff areas and pressure wave up and down or
    across the tissue. The key is to take your time and focus on
    qualitative smashing. One of the biggest mistakes that people make
    is to roll their foot over a ball with zero intention or purpose. It
    should take you at least a minute to traverse the length of your foot.
4 To get more weight over the ball and increase pressure, do this
  mobilization while standing.


Forefoot Mobilization
    This is another effective foot mobilization that can be used in
conjunction with the plantar surface smash.
    There is a big joint right in the middle of your foot that is responsible
for giving your foot arch support. When this mid-joint gets ropey and stiff
—either from bad foot mechanics or barefoot running—it limits your
ability to externally rotate and create a good arch. This is one of the
reasons why people’s feet pop up when they squat. They don’t have
rotational capacity in their mid-joint so when they try to create external
rotation by screwing their feet into the ground, their whole foot rolls up on
the outside.

IMPROVES:

          Neutral Foot Position
          Foot Pain (Plantar Fasciitis)




                                    923
If you grab your forefoot around the base of your toes, you should have
slight independent rotation from your heel. Think about like this. Your
hand is pretty flexible, right? Well, if the palm of your hand is really stiff,
you won’t be able to mold and shape it to gripping and grabbing. All
we’re doing here is making sure that your foot is a little bit moldable so
that you can create a good arch.




                                     924
1. Step on a lacrosse ball with the inside of your forefoot. Notice
   that the outer edge of my foot is flush with the ground. The
   idea is to block the front of the foot towards the ball and try to
   collapse down on it. Block the joint and shear past it.


                            925
        2. Applying downward pressure, create a shear force across the
           inside of your foot. Think about collapsing your foot over the
           ball.


Roller Forefoot Strumming
    Unlike the forefoot mobilization, which is more of a pinpoint-targeted
smash, the roller forefoot strumming captures the entire arch. Put
simply, it’s a non-accurate global smashing technique that captures all
the structural layers of your foot. For the best results, slowly collapse
your foot over the roller as if you are trying to peel off the edge of the
roller with your foot.




                                   926
927
1. Place the inside of your foot over the edge of a roller, targeting
   the inside line of your forefoot.
2. Apply steady and slow downward pressure. Think about
   trying to peel off the edge of the roller with your foot.




                            928
To check out The Latest MWOD Tools and Gear, and for More
Information About The Starrett system of Movement and
Mobility, Visit:

WWW.MOBILITYWOD.COM




                           929
                        GLOSSARY

Adduction: Describes moving a limb closer to the centerline of the
body.
Banded Distraction: To pull the joint surfaces apart using a band, or to
try and influence the intra-articular motions of the joint by creating more
usable space by manipulating the joint capsule.
Bias: Emphasizing a certain position or movement, such as in a hip
flexion with external rotation bias.
Buffer: Refers to the capacity of the body to withstand poor movement
or positioning. Theoretically, healthy normal tissues that have their full
ranges of motion can withstand more compromised mechanics than
their stiff and restricted counterparts.
Extension: The opposite of flexion. This is a movement that opens the
angle of a joint, as you do, for example, each time you walk and your
back leg straightens out.
Extension Force: Describes either a force vector that facilitates further
extension, like lying on a roller and arching back, or the forces on the
body consistent with extension-related movements.
External Rotation: Rotation of a limb or joint away from the center or
midline of the body. Sitting in lotus pose in yoga, for example, requires
both the shoulder and hip to externally rotate.
Flexion: Used to describe a movement that decreases the angle of a
joint, such as when you bring your elbow to your face.

                                   930
Global Extension/Flexion: Refers to spinal movement patterns that
occur through more than one functional region (lumbar and thoracic
spine, etc.). Athletes use a global spinal position, for example, when
doing a forward summersault, blocking a ball at the net, throwing a
baseball, or bench pressing.
Internal Rotation: Rotation of a limb or joint toward the midline or
center of the body. When you bring your hand to your face, for example,
your shoulder has to internally rotate to allow that movement.
Intra-Relate: How tissues relate to themselves. For example, stiff
muscle tissue does not “intra-relate” to the muscle tissues within the
same muscle. This is different than when tissues inter-relate between
different tissue systems.
Load-Order Sequence (Sequencing) and Load-Ordering: A basic
principle of tissue loading in the body. In other words, tissues that are
moved first during movement are loaded maximally in that movement.
The body’s tissues are not perfectly self-equalizing in nature. If the knee
moves first during the squat, the quads and kneecap will load first and
maximally.
Local Extension: Refers to movements in the spine that occur at a few
of the spine’s motion segments rather than globally throughout the spine.
Examples of this include hinging at the neck during a deadlift, or
overextending at the bottom of the ribcage during a press.
Missing Corner: An imprecise catchall term used to describe a
missing arc, ray, vector or aspect of a range-of-motion. Full shoulder
flexion also includes full external rotation of the joint when the arm is
over the head. If the athlete cannot externally rotate here, it is said that he
or she is missing this “corner.”
Motion Segments: The functional moving units (vertebra segments) of

                                     931
the spine.
Passive Accessory Motion: Describes the small intra-articular
movements that happen inside a joint during normal range-of-motion.
Posting up: Refers to loading an entire limb in weight bearing during a
mobilization.
Shear Force: Describes trying to restore normal sliding surface
interaction with a specific, usually oblique force or load. If you were
trying to pull apart a grilled cheese sandwich, for instance, you would
bring shear force to the sandwich to separate the slices of bread from
each other.
Sliding Surfaces: Describes any surface of the body where tissues
should normally slide over one another like skin over bone. This term
can include skin, nerves, fascia, and muscles.
Superfriend: A trusted confidant who helps you to overcome your
crappy mechanics. A Superfriend always knows the safe-word you have
both agreed upon and never pushes you beyond the pain threshold you
set. Sometimes you just need a Superfriend to smash your quads.
Tacked-Down and Matted-Down: Slang for stiff, unsupple tissues
that do not behave like normal human tissue. Sitting in a chair all day
will result in matted-down glutes.
Tensioner: When I say, “use the whole leg as a tensioner,” I am
describing the specific movement of a limb to apply tension to a
mobilization. If you were mobilizing your hamstrings and pulled your
knee to your chest, for instance, you’d extend your lower leg as the
“tensioner.”




                                   932
           ABOUT THE AUTHORS




Dr. Kelly Starrett is a coach, physical therapist, author, speaker, and
creator of MobilityWOD.com, which has revolutionized how athletes
think about human movement and athletic performance.
Kelly received his Doctor of Physical Therapy in 2007 from Samuel
Merritt College in Oakland, California. He and his wife Juliet own San
Francisco CrossFit—one of the first 50 CrossFit affiliates—where Kelly
runs a performance-based orthopedic sports medicine clinic. Kelly’s
clients have included Olympic gold medalists, Tour de France cyclists,
world and national record holding Olympic Lifting and Power athletes,
CrossFit Games medalists, ballet dancers, military personnel, and

                                   933
competitive age division athletes.
Since 2009, Kelly has been traveling the country teaching coaches and
athletes that good mobility and proper movement are the keys to optimal
performance and that all humans should be able to perform basic
maintenance on themselves.




Glen Cordoza is one of the most published authors in the world on the
topics of MMA, Brazilian Jiu-jitsu, Muay Thai kick-boxing, and fitness,
with over seventeen books to his credit. These works include co-
authorship with such marital art luminaries as Randy Couture, BJ Penn,
Anderson Silva, Fedor Emelianenko, Lyoto Machida, Eddie Bravo, Cung
Le, Antonio Nogueira, and Marcelo Garcia. In addition to Glen’s

                                     934
accomplishments as an author, he is a strength-and-conditioning coach
and has competed as a professional mixed martial artist (MMA) and
Muay Thai boxer.




                                 935
1 Spoken by the character, Stilgar, in the science fiction novel, Dune.




                                   936
1 Coaches and physical therapists have chalked back pain up to having
tight hamstrings for ages. Although tight hamstrings contribute to back
pain, it’s more than likely only part of the problem. It’s a system of
systems. Position, movement mechanics, and other tight musculature—
psoas, hip flexors, quads, to name a few—all play a role.




                                 937
