Healthy diet
Developed by

WHO Collaborating Centre for Capacity Building and Research in Community-based Noncommunicable
Disease Prevention and Control
Centre for Community Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India
Lifestyle management : healthy diet




      Increase fruit   Maintain healthy/    Reduce
      and vegetable      appropriate       salt and fat
       consumption          weight           intake




                                                          FOR PATIENTS


                               1
Lifestyle management : healthy diet
• Managing your diet is very important for good health.
• Methods include reducing salt and saturated fat intake and consuming adequate amounts of vegetables and
  fruits to maintain a healthy weight.
• When a patient with hypertension eats food high in salt, the sodium in the salt increases blood volume,
  resulting in higher blood pressure.
• It is very important to reduce salt intake to 5 grams per day.




                                                                                       FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER


                                                     2
Tips for healthy eating
 • Eat a wide variety from all food groups such as pulses, cereals and dairy products.
 • Eat adequate amounts of fruits and vegetables.
 • Reduce fats.
 • Reduce salt.




                                                                                FOR PATIENTS


                                           3
Tips for healthy eating

    •   Eat a wide variety from all food groups such as pulses, cereals and dairy products.
    •   Eat adequate amounts of healthy carbohydrates.
    •   Reduce saturated fats and trans fats.
    •   Reduce salt.




                                                                                         FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER


                                                     4
Why do you need to take less salt in your diet?


           high salt intake = high disease burden


                           Hypertension
                              Angina
                              Stroke
                              Cancer
                           Heart attack
                            Dementia
                          Kidney disease




                                                    FOR PATIENTS


                                5
Health risks of eating too much salt
• Salt is a compound of sodium and chloride. Chloride is what gives the salt its taste but only in combination
  with sodium.
• Consuming too much salt (sodium) can increase the blood pressure
• Consuming too much salt (sodium) can cause various diseases.
• Salt makes your body hold on to more water.
• This extra stored water raises your blood pressure and puts strain on your kidneys, arteries, heart and brain.
• One gram of salt contains 400 mg of sodium. Thus if we consume 5 gms of salt daily is equal to 2 grams
  of sodium.




                                   McGuire, Shelley. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                   (United States), Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010.                                            FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
                                   Advances in Nutrition: an international review journal, 2011, 2.3: 293-294.

                                                                        6
How to cut down on sugar?

• Reduce soft drinks, soda and juice.
• Sweeten foods yourself.
                        .
• Check labels and opt for
  low sugar products
• Avoid processed or packaged foods
• Prepare more meals at home
• Reduce the amount of sugar while
  cooking
• Don’t replace fat with sugar

                                        FOR PATIENTS


                                7
How to cut down on sugar?
• Reduce soft drinks, soda and juice. Eg, try water with lemon or lime instead.
  Cut down on creamers and sweeteners you add to tea and coffee.
• Don’t replace saturated fat with sugar. Low-fat doesn’t mean healthy when the fat has been replaced
  by added sugar.
• Sweeten foods yourself. Buy unsweetened iced tea, plain yogurt, or unflavored oatmeal, for example,
  and add sweetener (or fruit) yourself. You’ll likely add far less sugar than the manufacturer.
• Check labels and opt for low sugar products and use fresh or frozen ingredients instead of canned goods.
  Be especially aware of the sugar content of cereals and sugary drinks.
• Avoid processed or packaged foods like canned soups, frozen dinners, or low-fat meals that often contain
  hidden sugar. Prepare more meals at home.
• Reduce the amount of sugar while cooking by ¼ to half. You can boost sweetness with mint, cinnamon,
  nutmeg, or vanilla extract instead of sugar.




                                                                                         FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER

                                                      8
Tips for healthy cooking
 • To reduce calories, boil or steam rather than fry.
 • Do not overcook starches and vegetables.
 • When adding seasonings use mustard, vinegar, pepper, lemon and low-calorie
   artificial sweetener if sweetness is required.
 • Use fresh ingredients rather than processed foods.




                                                                           FOR PATIENTS


                                        9
Tips for healthy cooking
• To reduce calorie intake from oil, boiling or steaming is better than frying.
• Prolonged exposure to heat also destroys fibre and nutrients.
• Fibre slows down digestion, boosts absorption of nutrients and helps control blood sugar levels.
• Adding vinegar or lemon slows the passage of food from the stomach to small intestines.
• When adding sweeteners, use low-calorie sweeteners rather than sugar, honey or syrup to help reduce
  total calorie intake.
• Choosing fresh ingredients rather than processed foods is beneficial because they are usually lower
  in calories and contain less salt and sodium.




                                                                                       FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER

                                                    10
Tips when eating out
  • Be aware of the type of food and portion sizes you eat in restaurants.
  • Be aware of the amount of colories in the food you eat.
  • Do not skip a meal before eating out.
  • Try choosing items with a lot of vegetables.
  • If you overeat, remember to burn off the calories by increasing physical activity.




                                                                               FOR PATIENTS


                                          11
Tips when eating out
• There are times when you have to eat out in the course of your duties, or with friends and family.
• It is important to learn ways to manage your diabetes while eating out.
• First of all, it is important to be aware of the type of food and portion sizes of the restaurant.
• If you are aware of how much food and how many calories you normally eat, it will be easier for you to
  order accordingly.
• Do not skip a meal before eating out as it will raise your chances of overeating.
• If your meal is later than your regular mealtime, eat a snack.
• Try to choose items with a lot of vegetables.
• When you overeat, remember to burn off the extra calories through physical activity, or by reducing
  the amount of food you eat at the next meal.




                                     SOURCE:
                                     Ordering Tips. American Diabetes Association. 2016.
                                     (http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/food-tips/eating-out/ordering-tips.html,   FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
                                     accessed 28 September 2016).

                                                                        12
Choose healthy carbohydrates
Good carbohydrates


    banana        apple         multi-grain bread        brown rice




  cheakpea        kidney bean               oat             blueberry   legume


Bad carbohydrates
• Pastries
• White pasta
• Ice-creams
• Energy drinks
• Candies
• Sugary drinks
                                                                                 FOR PATIENTS


                                                    13
Choose healthy carbohydrates
Carbohydrates, found in many of the foods we eat, are digested and turn into glucose, which is an important
fuel for our bodies.

Types of carbohydrates
There are three main types of carbohydrates:
 • Sugar - Sugar is the simplest form of carbohydrate and occurs naturally in some foods,
   including fruits, vegetables, milk and milk products. Types of sugar include fruit sugar (fructose),
   table sugar (sucrose) and milk sugar (lactose).
 • Starch - Starch is a complex carbohydrate, meaning it is made of many sugar units bonded
   together. Starch occurs naturally in vegetables, grains, and cooked dry beans and peas.
 • Fiber - Fiber also is a complex carbohydrate. It occurs naturally in fruits, vegetables,
   whole grains, and cooked dry beans and peas.




                                  Source :
                                  American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes—2015. Diabetes Care, 2015.
                                  International Diabetes Federation.                                                                FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
                                  Global guideline for type 2 diabetes. Brussels: IDF Clinical Guidelines Task Force, 2012.

                                                                       14
Low-fat diet: choosing healthy fats

       Reduce saturated fat (BAD FATS),
       Replace with unsaturated fat (GOOD FATS)




                  GOOD FATS
                           Vs.
                    BAD FATS

                      7




                                                  FOR PATIENTS


                                  15
Low-fat diet: choosing healthy fats

• Substituting unhealthy fat (saturated) with healthy fat (unsaturated) is better than reducing total fat itself.
• If you cut fat intake just because you think “fat is bad” and instead eat more carbohydrates such as sugar,
  white bread, white rice and potatoes, you will gain more weight and your blood triglyceride levels will
  increase.
• While excess energy intake through too much fat causes obesity, it is still important to eat an adequate
 amount of the right kind of fat (unsaturated).




                                    McGuire, Shelley. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
                                    (United States), Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010.                                            FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
                                    Advances in Nutrition:an international review journal, 2011, 2.3: 293-294.

                                                                         16
Low-fat diet : more fibre
1. Eat two servings of fruit
   What is a serving?




   One medium sized banana, one apple, one mango                One cup (diced) apple, pineapple,
                                                                mango, watermelon etc

2. Eat three servings of vegetables.
   Get your 3 servings from colorful vegetables such as the ones below.
  What is a serving?




Half a Cup
beans, celery, cucumber, green leafy vegetables, onion, corn       One Whole
                                                                   carrot, capsicum, spring onion, tomato

                               1 serving of fruits and vegetables = 80 gram weight.                   FOR PATIENTS


                                                        17
Low-fat diet : morefibre
                                VEGETABLES                      1 SERVING
                             (excluding potato)              = 80 gram weight

                         Raw leafy vegetables           1 cup (80 grams)
   Potatoes & tubers
   are not included in                                  1 medium size piece Or,
   vegetables.           Fruits                         80 gram weight

                         Other vegetables or fruits,    ½ cup
                         cooked or chopped raw

                         Vegetable juice/ fruit juice   ½ cup




                                                                           FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER


                                            18
What is Body Mass Index?                             weight (kg)
                                               BMI =
                                                     height (m)
                                                               2




         Normal weight        Overweight             Obese
       (BMI 18.5 to 24.9)   (BMI 25 to 29.9)   (BMI 30 and above)




                                                                    FOR PATIENTS


                                    19
What is Body Mass Index?

• BMI International Classification: (for adults)
   o Underweight : <18.5 Kg/m2
   o Normal : 18.5–24.9 Kg/m2
   o Overweight : 25.0–29.9 Kg/m2
   o Obese : > 30.0 Kg/m2




                                                   FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER


                                            20
What is normal waist circumference?

                        For men        For women




 Waist circumference:                              Waist circumference:
 <90 cm or <35 inches                              <80 cm or <32 inches

                                                                FOR PATIENTS


                                  21
Why is waist circumference important?
  • Abdominal obesity is associated with increased risk of CVDs and diabetes. Abdominal obesity,
    commonly known as belly fat or clinically as central obesity, is the accumulation of abdominal fat or
    visceral fat resulting in an increase in waist size. There is a strong correlation between central obesity
    and CVD.
  • Waist circumference should be measured at the midpoint between the lower margin of the least
    palpable rib and the top of the iliac crest, using a stretch‐resistant tape



    WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE
     • MEN > 90 CM
     • WOMEN > 80 CM


                                       Correct way to measure waist circumference   Important points
                                        1. First, stand with your arms hanging        • Waist circumference is NOT measure
                                           naturally by your sides.                     around the narrowest part of the waist.
                                        2. Relax and breathe out normally.            • Measure horizontally around the waist
                                           Don’t pull in your tummy on purpose.         at the level of the navel. Do not compress
                                        3. Measure horizontally around your waist       the skin with the tape.
                                           at the level of your navel.

                                                                                                        FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER


                                                           22
