Jim Stoppani’s Encyclopedia of
      Muscle & Strength

          Second Edition

         Jim Stoppani, PhD




            Human Kinetics
[Library of Congress Info]
ISBN: 978-1-4504-5974-7 (print) Copyright © 2015, 2006 by Jim Stoppani All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the
reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including xerography, photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without
the written permission of the publisher.
This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information relevant to the subject matter presented. It is
published and sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, medical, or other
professional services by reason of their authorship or publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought.
The web addresses cited in this text were current as of June 2014, unless otherwise noted.
Acquisitions Editor: Justin Klug Senior Managing Editor: Amy Stahl Associate Managing Editor: Anne Mrozek Copyeditor: Jan
Feeney
Indexer: Michael Ferreira Permissions Manager: Martha Gullo Graphic Designer: Nancy Rasmus Graphic Artist: Francine Hamerski
Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg Photograph (cover): Pavel Ythjall Photographs (interior): Neil Bernstein, unless otherwise noted;
figures 4.1, 4.7, 4.9, 4.14, 4.15, 4.32, and 4.37 courtesy of Jim Stoppani; figure 4.35 courtesy of Power Plate North America, Inc.;
figure 4.36 courtesy of Robert Q. Riley Enterprises Visual Production Assistant: Joyce Brumfield Photo Production Manager: Jason
Allen Art Manager: Kelly Hendren Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn Illustrations: © Human Kinetics, unless otherwise noted
Printer: Sheridan Books
We thank Metroflex Gym in Long Beach, California, for assistance in providing the location for the photo shoot for this book.
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts can also be created to
specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
Website: www.HumanKinetics.com United States: Human Kinetics P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics


475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only) e-mail: info@hkcanada.com Europe: Human Kinetics


107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom +44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia: Human Kinetics 57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062


08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com New Zealand: Human Kinetics P.O. Box 80
Torrens Park, South Australia 5062


0800 222 062
e-mail: info@hknewzealand.com E6002
                              Contents
Part I: Training Essentials

  Chapter 1: Core Concepts
  Definitions of Strength
  Types of Muscle Action
  Principles of Strength Training
  Warming Up, Stretching, and Cooling Down
  Summary

  Chapter 2: Training Variables
  Choice of Exercises
  Order of Exercises
  Number of Sets
  Resistance
  Rest Period Between Sets
  Additional Factors
  Summary

  Chapter 3: Training Cycles
  Classic Periodization
  Reverse Linear Periodization
  Undulating Periodization
  Microcycles
  Combining Periodized Schemes
  Types of Training Cycles
  Summary

  Chapter 4: Strength Training Equipment
  Simple Resistance
  Variable Resistance
  Speed Machines
  Nontraditional and New Apparatus
  Summary
Part II: Training for Muscle Mass

  Chapter 5: Tactics for Building Muscle Mass
  Weekly Splits
  Body-Part Training

  Chapter 6: Programs for Building Muscle Mass
  Programs That Manipulate Sets
  Programs That Manipulate Repetitions
  Programs That Manipulate Load
  Programs That Manipulate Rest Periods
  Programs That Manipulate Exercise Selection
  Programs That Manipulate Training Frequency

  Chapter 7: Training Cycles for Building Muscle Mass
  Mass-Building Programs
  Goal Tending
  Muscle Focus

Part III: Training for Maximal Strength

  Chapter 8: Tactics for Maximizing Strength
  Weekly Splits
  Essentials of Strength Programs

  Chapter 9: Programs for Maximizing Strength
  Programs That Manipulate Sets
  Programs That Manipulate Repetitions
  Programs That Manipulate Load
  Programs That Manipulate Rest Periods
  Programs That Manipulate Exercise Selection
  Programs That Manipulate Training Frequency

  Chapter 10: Training Cycles for Gaining Maximal Strength
  Testing One-Repetition Maximum
  Beginner Overall Strength Program
  Intermediate Strength Training Cycles
  Advanced Strength Training Cycles
  Lift-Specific Cycles
Part IV: Training for Maximal Fat Loss

  Chapter 11: Tactics for Maximizing Fat Loss
  Strength Training Techniques That Enhance Fat Loss
  Summary

  Chapter 12: Cardio Training for Maximizing Fat Loss
  HIIT Versus Steady-State Cardio
  Forms of HIIT
  Summary

  Chapter 13: Programs for Maximizing Fat Loss

Part V: Training Exercises

  Chapter 14: Chest

  Chapter 15: Shoulders

  Chapter 16: Back

  Chapter 17: Trapezius

  Chapter 18: Triceps

  Chapter 19: Biceps

  Chapter 20: Forearms

  Chapter 21: Quadriceps

  Chapter 22: Hamstrings and Glutes

  Chapter 23: Calves

  Chapter 24: Abdominals and Core

  Chapter 25: Whole Body

  Chapter 26: Calisthenics
Part VI: Nutrition for Maximizing Muscle Mass, Strength, and Fat Loss

  Chapter 27: Nutrition for Maximizing Muscle Mass and Strength
  Goal 1: Focus on Protein
  Goal 2: Get Ample Fat
  Goal 3: Manipulate Carbohydrate
  Goal 4: Count Calories
  Goal 5: Eat Frequently
  Goal 6: Use a Mixed Protein Powder
  Goal 7: Use Different Types of Carbohydrate Before and After Workouts
  Goal 8: Supplement Before and After Workouts
  Goal 9: Cover Your Vitamin and Mineral Needs With a Supplement
  Goal 10: Find What Works for You
  Sample Meal Plans

  Chapter 28: Nutrition for Maximizing Fat Loss
  Stepping Up Fat Loss
  Maintaining Your New Lean Body

Appendix A

Appendix B
  Meat Replacements
  Dairy Replacements
  Egg Replacements
  Vegetable Replacements
  Fruit Replacements
  Cereal Replacements
  Bread Replacements
  Grain Replacements
  Bean Replacements

Appendix C

Glossary

References

About the Author
                         Part I
                   Training Essentials




Strength training can be traced back to the beginning of recorded time. As early
as 2000 b.c.e., the ancient Egyptians lifted sacks of sand to strength-train for
hunting and military duty. According to military records, the Chinese also used
strength training for their military personnel as early as 700 b.c.e. But the
historical association that most people are familiar with is the ancient Greeks.
Many of the athletes who competed in the ancient Olympics lifted heavy stones
to develop strength and boost their athletic performance. Besides those
functional results, strength training provided the development of a muscular
physique. This masculine physique was honored in classic Greek art and writing.
In fact, it may be the ancient Greek culture’s celebration of muscle that is
responsible for spawning the modern sport of bodybuilding. Several famous
athletes during that period, such as Milo and Heracles, often performed feats of
strength and displayed their muscularity to spectators. In the 19th century, the
appreciation by the masses for heavily muscled physiques made celebrities out
of many performing strongmen of that time. The most famous was Eugen
Sandow, who is considered the father of bodybuilding.

Despite the fact that humans have a longstanding fascination with strength and
muscularity, the concept of strength training is one that few have familiarized
themselves with. Even during the fitness boom of the 1970s in the United States,
most Americans participated in some form of aerobic exercise but neglected the
strength component of physical fitness. Over the years, with help from pioneers
of strength training (such as Bob Hoffman, Joe Weider, and Charles Atlas) and
through advances in research on the developing science of resistance training,
strength became viewed as a necessary component of physical fitness and
athletic performance. And participation in strength training grew faster than
participation in any other physical activity.

As the popularity of strength training grew, so did awareness that this practice
was a complicated science that participants must fully understand in order to
reap the true benefits. That is why part I of this book is so important for anyone
interested in strength training at any level. Unless you clearly understand the
principles of strength training, you will never fully comprehend how to
implement an effective strength training program.

So before you skip ahead to one of the strength training programs in parts II, III,
and IV, be sure you have a decent grasp of the fundamentals presented in these
first four chapters. Armed with this background, you will have a much fuller
understanding of the exercises, techniques, and programs presented in the other
chapters. You also will be more capable of individualizing these techniques to
create specialized programs for yourself and for others.
                            Chapter 1
                          Core Concepts
Strength training is performed by a wide range of people for a variety of reasons.
Most are interested in gaining muscle strength and muscle mass with a
concomitant loss of body fat. In addition, many people expect these physical
adaptations to carry over into improvements in performance of athletic
endeavors and daily life activities. Strength training can provide these
adaptations as long as you follow certain principles, which are discussed here to
help you realize your strength training goals. These principles are integral to
understanding how strength training works, how to individualize it to meet your
needs and goals, and how to change it to continue making adaptations as you
progress.

In addition to understanding the concepts of strength training, you must be
familiar with the terminology that is often used in discussions of strength
training. Having the ability to understand and use this lexicon will help you to
learn the fundamentals of strength training and to communicate with others who
participate in strength training. To familiarize yourself with this vocabulary, refer
to the glossary at the end of this book.

Before we can discuss the principles of strength training, we must define the
major terms that will be discussed throughout this book. First and foremost is the
actual term strength training. If you’ve done a fair share of reading on the topic
of strength training—be it on the Internet, in magazines, or in other books—
you’ve probably discovered that the terms strength training, weight training, and
resistance training are often used interchangeably. While there are definite
similarities in the three terms, a more precise interpretation of the definitions
points out the differences. Resistance training is the broadest of the three terms.
It describes any type of training in which the body must move in some direction
against some type of force that resists that movement. This could include lifting
free weights, pushing against a hydraulic apparatus, or running up a set of stairs.
Strength training is a type of resistance training (although not all types of
resistance training are strength training). Specifically, strength training refers to
any type of training that involves the body moving in some direction against a
force that specifically induces changes in muscle strength or hypertrophy
(muscle growth). This could include lifting free weights or moving against a
hydraulic apparatus, but not running up a set of stairs. Weight training is also a
type of resistance training and can be a type of strength training. By strict terms
of its definition, it refers to any type of training in which the body moves in
some direction against a force that resists that movement and is supplied by
some type of weight. This could include free weights and weight machines but
not training with a hydraulic apparatus or running up a set of stairs. See table 1.1
for a list of training methods that are categorized under each of these types of
training.
This book covers strength training (most of it will be weight training), because it
best describes the types of training that we are interested in—exercise that
involves the body moving against a force in an effort to induce changes in
muscle strength or hypertrophy.


                     Definitions of Strength
The basic definition of strength is the maximal amount of force a muscle or
muscle group can generate in a specified movement pattern at a specified
velocity (speed) of movement (Knuttgen and Kraemer 1987). But defining
strength is not that simple. That’s because strength has many manifestations. The
following definitions are all forms of strength.
absolute strength—The maximal amount of force a muscle can produce when
   all inhibitory and protective mechanisms are removed. Because of this, it is
   rare that a person could ever demonstrate his or her absolute strength. This can
   take place only under extreme measures such as during an emergency, under
   hypnosis, or with certain ergogenic aids.
maximal strength—The maximal amount of force a muscle or muscle groups
   can produce in a specific exercise for one repetition. This is also referred to as
   one-repetition maximum, or 1RM. Some estimate that the 1RM usually
   amounts to only about 80 percent of absolute strength. This type of strength is
   important for powerlifters.
relative strength—The ratio between a person’s maximal strength and his or her
   body weight. This is important when comparing the strength of athletes who
   are much different in body size. Relative strength is determined by dividing
   the 1RM by the body weight of the person. For example, a 200-pound (91-
   kilogram) athlete who can bench-press 400 pounds (400 ÷ 200 = 2) has the
   same relative strength as a 100-pound (45-kilogram) athlete who can bench-
   press 200 pounds (200 ÷ 100 = 2). This type of strength is important for
   powerlifters as well as for football players and other strength athletes who are
   often compared with other teammates as a means of predicting performance
   on the field.
speed strength—The ability to move the body or an object quickly. This term is
   more commonly known as power. This type of strength is important for most
   sports but is most critical in track and field events such as the shot put, javelin,
   and long jump.
starting strength—The ability to generate a sharp rise in power during the initial
   phase of the movement. This type of strength is important in Olympic
   weightlifting, deadlifts, boxing, martial arts, and offensive line positions in
   football, where strength must be generated immediately.
acceleration strength—The ability to continue the sharp rise in power
   throughout most of the movement of the exercise. This type of strength takes
   over after starting strength and is important for sports such as judo, wrestling,
   and sprinting.
endurance strength—The ability to maintain force production for a longer time
   or through multiple repetitions of an exercise. This type of strength is
   important in wrestling, cycling, swimming, and training for bodybuilding.

Considering these numerous types of strength that a person can train for
specifically, it’s easy to understand that the term strength training encompasses
many types of training approaches. Regardless of whether you are training for
maximal strength, power, or endurance strength, you are following some form of
strength training. Each of these types of strength is developed with the use of
resistance of some type, be it free weights, machines, or body weight. Although
this book focuses on strength training for muscle mass and strength, as well as
fat loss, other muscle adaptations can take place with the use of strength training.


                     Types of Muscle Action
During a typical strength training session, muscles may contract from tens to
hundreds of times to move the body or the implement they are training with.
Neural stimulation of the muscle causes the contractile units of the muscle to
attempt to shorten. But contraction does not always involve shortening of the
muscle fibers. Depending on the load and the amount of force supplied by the
muscle, three different muscle actions may occur during a muscle contraction
(see figure 1.1):

 1. Concentric muscle action. This type of muscle action occurs when the
    muscle force exceeds the external resistance, resulting in joint movement as
    the muscle shortens. In other words, concentric contractions are those in
    which the muscle fibers shorten while contracting to lift the weight. This is
    demonstrated by the upward phase of a biceps curl and is often referred to
    as the positive phase of the repetition.
 2. Eccentric muscle action. This type of muscle action occurs when the
    external resistance exceeds the force supplied by the muscle, resulting in
    joint movement as the muscle lengthens. Eccentric muscle actions are
    demonstrated by the downward phase of the biceps curl. This is often
    referred to as the negative portion of the repetition. Even though the fibers
    are lengthening, they’re also in a state of contraction, permitting the weight
    to return to the starting position in a controlled manner.
 3. Isometric muscle action. This type of muscle action occurs when the muscle
    contracts without moving, generating force while its length remains static.
    Isometric muscle actions are demonstrated in an attempt to lift an
    immovable object or an object that is too heavy to move. The muscle fibers
    contract in an attempt to move the weight, but the muscle does not shorten
    in overall length because the object is too heavy to move.
 Figure 1.1 Major types of muscle actions: concentric, isometric, and eccentric.




Among strength training scientists there is much debate about the importance of
each of these types of muscle actions regarding increases in strength and muscle
mass. Studies have been conducted in an effort to determine whether one type of
muscle action is most important for enhancing muscle strength and mass.
Because it is possible to produce greater force during eccentric and isometric
muscle actions as compared to concentric muscle actions, it has been
hypothesized that these muscle actions may be more important than concentric
muscle actions for inducing changes in muscle strength and size.

Researchers have found that training with isometric muscle actions can increase
muscle strength and size (Fleck and Schutt 1985). However, the strength gains
from isometric training are realized only during the specific joint angles at which
the muscles were trained. In other words, if someone trains isometrically on the
bench press at the point halfway between the start and finish, that person will
gain muscle strength only at that specific point in the exercise. This would not
equate to greater overall strength in the bench press unless a variety of joint
angles between the start and finish were also trained isometrically. Therefore,
while isometric training can be beneficial, concentric and eccentric muscle
actions should also be included for better overall muscle adaptations. For a
sample training program that uses isometric muscle actions, see Static Strength
Training in chapter 9.

Because it is possible to overload a muscle more during eccentric muscle
contractions, these contractions cause more muscle damage. It has been
hypothesized that this greater overload can induce greater gains in strength.
Indeed, research has shown that eccentric-only training does induce significant
strength gains; however, this training appears to offer no greater strength benefit
than concentric-only training. Therefore, to maximize muscle adaptations,
strength training programs need to incorporate both concentric and eccentric
muscle actions. For sample training programs that incorporate eccentric training,
see Negative Repetitions in chapter 6 and Negative-Rep Strength Training in
chapter 9.

The use of concentric, eccentric, and isometric muscle actions in strength
training will yield somewhat different adaptations. Although isometric muscle
actions can improve strength and muscle size to some degree, they provide
mainly static strength. This does not necessarily carry over to dynamic strength
used for most sports. Therefore, most strength training programs should focus on
concentric and eccentric muscle actions. Greater improvements in strength and
muscle mass can be achieved when repetitions include both concentric and
eccentric muscle actions.

Another type of muscle action that should be considered here is called voluntary
maximal muscle action. This type of muscle action does not refer to the actual
movement of the muscle but to the intensity of the resistance. When a muscle
undergoes a voluntary maximal muscle action, it is moving against as much
resistance as its current fatigue level will allow. Regardless of how many
repetitions are performed in a set—whether it be 1 or 10—it is the last repetition,
when momentary concentric muscle failure is reached, that is considered the
voluntary maximal muscle action. In other words, not another single repetition
can be performed. This is also referred to as the repetition maximum (RM) and is
usually represented with a number preceding the RM. For example, 1RM would
represent the amount of weight that induces a voluntary maximal muscle action
with one repetition. A 10RM is the amount of weight that induces a voluntary
maximal muscle action on the 10th repetition.


             Principles of Strength Training
Countless principles of strength training are being employed today. But the
validity of many of these principles is questionable, because few strength
training professionals agree on the majority of them. However, there are a few
principles that are revered by all strength training professionals: the principle of
specificity, the principle of progressive overload, the principle of individuality,
the principle of variation, the principle of maintenance, and the principle of
reversibility. So important are these principles that few would argue against their
being considered laws of strength training.
principle of specificity—One of the seminal principles in designing strength
  training programs. It is often referred to as SAID, which stands for “specific
  adaptation to imposed demands.” In its most basic definition, it means to train
  in a specific manner to produce a specific outcome. For instance, if the
  immediate goal is to increase 1RM strength, then training with the appropriate
  range of repetition, proper rest periods, and apposite frequency to optimize
  strength gains is a necessity. Or if the goal is to increase athletic performance
  in a specific sport, the exercises should mimic the types of movements
  performed in the sport, and they should be performed at a similar speed as
  those movements. This principle is one of the most important in strength
  training because if it is not being met, all other principles are negated.
principle of progressive overload—The practice of continually increasing the
  intensity of the workout as the muscle becomes accustomed to that intensity
  level. This can be done by increasing the weight lifted, the number of
  repetitions performed, or the total number of sets; or it can be done by
  decreasing the rest between sets. Continually increasing the stress placed on
  the muscle allows the muscle to increase its strength and prevents stagnation.
  This is one of the most critical principles of strength training as well as one of
  the earliest developed. This principle was established just after World War II
  by the research of DeLorme (1945) and DeLorme and Watkins (1948).
  Without providing the muscles with progressive overload, continual
  adaptations in muscle strength and size would cease. For example, at the start
  of a strength training program, performing three sets of 10 reps on the bench
  press with 135 pounds may be a challenge. After several weeks of training,
  performing three sets of 10 reps on the bench press with 135 pounds will
  become easy. At this stage, training adaptations will cease unless the weight is
  increased above 135 pounds, the reps are increased above 10 reps, the sets are
  increased to more than three, or the rest between sets is decreased.
principle of individuality—The theory that any training program must consider
  the specific needs or goals and abilities of the person for whom it is designed.
  For example, a beginning bodybuilder with the goal of adding muscle mass
  would have a much different training program than an advanced bodybuilder
  with the same goal. The difference in their training programs is based not on
  their desired training outcomes but on their training experiences. The
  advanced trainer would require more volume and high-intensity training
  techniques to reach the same goal as the beginner. On the other hand, an
  advanced lifter who has the goal of gaining muscle mass would train much
  differently than an advanced lifter with the goal of gaining muscle strength.
  Here the difference in their training programs is based on their different goals.
  In general, the advanced lifter with the goal of gaining more muscle strength
  would train with fewer reps, heavier weight, and lower volume than the
  advanced lifter with the muscle mass goal.
principle of variation—The simple fact that no matter how effective a program
  is, it will be effective only for a short period. Once a person has experienced
  the specific adaptations that a particular training program is designed to
  provide, a new stimulus must be imposed on the muscles or continued
  progress will be stagnated. This is the foundation of periodization (discussed
  in chapter 3) and is the reason that training cycles must be employed.
principle of maintenance—As a person reaches his or her goals, it takes less
  work to maintain that level of strength or muscle mass. If he or she is happy
  with that level, the frequency of training can be reduced. This is typically a
  good time to involve more cross-training so that other fitness components can
  be developed.
principle of reversibility—The fact that once the strength training program is
  discontinued or not maintained at the minimal level of frequency and
  intensity, the strength or hypertrophy adaptations that were made with that
  program will not only stop forward progression but will also revert back to the
  starting level.


 Warming Up, Stretching, and Cooling Down
You might have trouble finding the time to sneak in a workout, let alone worry
about properly warming up before and stretching after the workout. However,
how you prepare and end your strength training sessions can have a big impact
on your results as well as your quality of life, especially as you get older. Try
your best to warm up properly before each workout and do some stretching to
cool down after the workout.

A general warm-up of 5 to 10 minutes on a treadmill or stationary bike, some
calisthenics, or, better yet, dynamic stretches such as high kicks and arm circles
will raise your body temperature sufficiently. A study by Taylor and colleagues
(2011) found that just a 0.3 °F increase in body temperature allowed athletes to
jump 6 percent higher and have 10 percent more power. In other words, a short
warm-up allows you to be stronger and perform better in the gym. Doing
dynamic stretches as a warm-up further increases muscle power and strength
during the warm-up. On the other hand, static stretching before strength training
may impair muscle power and strength during the workout.

Your best bet is to save static stretching for the cool-down and as a way to
increase your flexibility. This form of stretching is particularly effective for
maximizing flexibility when done after workouts when the body is warmer and
the muscles are more fatigued. This book does not focus on stretching exercises,
so for a good resource, pick up the book Full-Body Flexibility, Second Edition,
by Jay Blahnik (Human Kinetics 2011).


                                Summary
To properly apply any discipline, you must first familiarize yourself with the
principles of the discipline. Without a clear understanding of the foundation of
strength training, the application of it will be lacking. Just as an athlete who
doesn’t understand the basics of his sport will do poorly in that sport, not
understanding the basics of strength training will severely limit your potential.
Regardless of whether your goal is to increase muscle mass or muscle strength,
having this knowledge will have a positive effect on your ability to reach your
goal.

First you must understand the different types of strength that you can train for:
absolute, maximal, relative, speed, starting, acceleration, and endurance. Being
familiar with the different muscle actions is essential to understanding the
components of any repetition you perform. You will learn the concepts to follow
in order for adaptations to take place. This basic information is just the starting
point. This knowledge base will continue to grow with information contained in
the following chapters of part I. Once you are armed with this seminal
information, applying the training techniques and programs in the later sections
will be easier and the results will be more substantial.
                         Chapter 2
                     Training Variables
The average strength training program will last several weeks to several months
before a new training phase is implemented. Considering this time frame, a
single workout may seem inconsequential to the overall program. Yet the design
of each single workout is just as important as the overall program. This is
because each workout adds up sequentially to create the long-term training
program that will provide the adaptations that the program imparts. This chapter
discusses the principles involved in designing a single strength training workout.

Every workout is composed of at least five specific program variables that you
can manipulate in order to alter the workout: choice of exercises, order of
exercises, number of sets, resistance, and rest taken between sets. You must
carefully choose these variables to get a workout that is appropriate for your
level of fitness and that initiates the desired adaptations.

Although strength athletes such as Olympic weightlifters, powerlifters, and
bodybuilders have manipulated these variables for many years, William J.
Kraemer, PhD, is credited with scientifically determining and recording what he
has termed the five specific clusters of acute program variables (see table 2.1).
The systematic alteration of these acute variables results in the periodized
training program.
Adapted from S.J. Fleck and W.J. Kraemer, Designing resistance training programs, 3rd ed. (Champaign,
                                   IL: Human Kinetics), 158-173.
                        Choice of Exercises
While all acute variables of a program are critical to a person’s progress, choice
of exercise is arguably one of the most critical. The reasoning behind this is that
if you are not training the appropriate muscle groups, then all other variables are
somewhat meaningless. Simply put, muscles that are not trained will not benefit
from the program. Therefore, choosing the proper exercises for each workout is
the first step in creating an effective strength program.

For those interested in gaining muscle strength, all exercises in a workout can be
categorized as either a primary exercise or an assistance exercise. Refer to table
2.2 for a list of common primary and assistance exercises. Primary exercises are
those that are most specific to the goals of the individual. These exercises must
involve the muscle groups in which the person is most interested in gaining
strength. For competitive athletes, the primary exercises not only should target
the same muscle groups that are used in competition but should also include
some exercises that mimic the movements performed in their sports. For
example, the primary exercises for an Olympic weightlifter are the clean and
jerk and the snatch; for a powerlifter they are the bench press, squat, and
deadlift; for an offensive lineman they are the squat and incline bench press.
Primary exercises usually are multijoint movements such as the bench press,
squat, and deadlift. These exercises require the coordinated use of multiple
muscle groups. Because several large muscle groups are used in performing
these exercises, they tend to be the ones in which the most weight can be lifted.
For instance, the world records in the deadlift and the squat are well over 900
and 1,100 pounds (408 and 499 kilograms), respectively. The world record in the
barbell biceps curl (although this is not a lift that is sanctioned by any
powerlifting federation), a single-joint exercise (typically referred to as an
assistance exercise), is not much more than 400 pounds (181 kilograms).
Because the primary exercises call for great strength and coordination, they
should be performed early in the workout when the muscle groups are the least
fatigued.

Assistance exercises typically are single-joint exercises such as the biceps curl,
triceps extension, and deltoid lateral raise. These exercises often involve only a
single muscle group. Because only one muscle group is working to lift the
weight, these exercises usually involve much lighter weight than primary
exercises do. For powerlifters and other strength athletes, assistance exercises
are usually done toward the end of the workout after the major muscle groups
are fairly fatigued from performing the primary exercises. An exception to the
rule that most assistance exercises are single-joint exercises is core training.
Training the core (the deep muscles in the abdominal cavity and lower back)
involves complicated movement patterns that involve multiple joints and force
the core musculature to work at stabilizing the body.
For those interested in building muscle size, all exercises also can be divided
into multijoint and single-joint exercises. However, the terms used in
bodybuilding circles are multijoint and isolation exercises. Isolation implies that
the single-joint movement is isolating the major muscle group and forcing it to
perform all the work in that exercise without the help from other muscle groups.
An example of this is the leg extension. While most major muscle groups have
both multijoint and isolation exercises that target them, the biceps, forearms,
calves, and abdominals are muscle groups that are trained usually with just
isolation exercises. For a list of multijoint and isolation exercises for most major
muscle groups, refer to table 2.3.
Exercise equipment is another factor to consider when choosing exercises for an
individual workout. While free weights are used in the majority of the primary
exercises, other equipment has its benefits depending on the overall goals of the
person. For example, to mimic movements that occur in a more horizontal plane
while an athlete is in an upright position (such as swinging a baseball bat), free
weights are a poor choice because they offer resistance only in a vertical plane.
Here, the use of a cable apparatus or resistance tubing would be a better exercise
choice. Choosing appropriate strength training equipment is discussed in more
detail in chapter 4.
                        Order of Exercises
How the specific exercises that make up a single workout are ordered will
determine not only the effectiveness of the workout but also the particular
adaptations that the program imparts. Therefore, the order in which exercises are
performed must correspond with the specific training goals.

In training for strength, the primary exercises are performed first in the workout
relative to assistance exercises. The logic behind this is the fact that primary
exercises typically involve numerous large muscle groups working together to
lift relatively heavy weight. Therefore, these exercises must be done early
enough in the program that fatigue is not an issue. Performing single-joint
exercises first will compromise the amount of weight a person can lift on the
primary exercises and may even make the person more susceptible to injury,
because form tends to suffer when muscles are fatigued.

If building muscle size is the primary goal, then multijoint exercises should be
performed first with isolation exercises performed later in the workout. The
multijoint exercises help to build muscle size because it is possible to train with
heavier weight on them. An exception to this rule involves a common
bodybuilding technique known as preexhaust. This technique involves the use of
single-joint exercises before multijoint exercises in an effort to exhaust a
particular muscle group so that it becomes the weak link in the multijoint
exercise. This concept is discussed in detail in chapter 6.

If multiple muscle groups are trained in a workout, such as in whole-body
workouts, and only one exercise per major muscle group is performed, then
ordering exercises involves determining the most critical muscle groups based
on the goals of the person. Typically, larger-sized muscle groups (such as the
legs and back) are trained before smaller muscle groups (such as the shoulders
and biceps) for the same reason mentioned previously: Larger muscle groups
need to be trained before fatigue is an issue.


                           Number of Sets
A set is a grouping of repetitions that is followed by a rest interval. The number
of sets performed in a workout is one of the factors affecting the total volume
(sets × repetitions × resistance) of exercise. Therefore, it must be consistent not
only with the individual’s strength goals but also with his or her current level of
fitness.

Generally speaking, it is accepted that multiple sets are more beneficial for
developing strength and muscle mass. In fact, this stance is supported in
guidelines set by the National Strength and Conditioning Association (Pearson et
al. 2000) and the American College of Sports Medicine (Kraemer et al. 2002).
Single sets are effective for building strength for beginning weightlifters or for
maintaining strength during periods when it is necessary or desired to reduce the
volume performed. Beginners starting with a single-set program should
progressively increase the number of sets to make continued adaptations in
strength.

When designing a workout, one should consider the number of sets performed
per exercise, the number of sets per muscle group, and the total number of sets
for the workout. The number of sets per exercise typically varies depending on
the strength training program. Most programs designed for the intermediate to
advanced weight trainer incorporate between three and six sets per exercise. This
set range is considered optimal for increasing strength. How many sets one
should perform per muscle group is a question that is most applicable to
bodybuilding-type training, in which numerous exercises are performed for each
muscle group. This is in opposition to strength training programs for
conditioning athletes, which may typically involve only one exercise per major
muscle group. The number of sets per muscle group may range from 3 to 24 but
ultimately depends on the number of exercises performed for that muscle group,
the number of muscle groups trained in that workout, the intensity used, and
where the person is in his or her training cycle. The total number of sets
performed for a workout may vary from about 10 to 40, depending on the type of
training and the number of sets per exercise. Care must be taken so that not too
many total sets are performed, particularly when intensity is high, since these
variables greatly influence total work. Performing too much total work over time
stresses the body and can lead to overtraining in the long run. Although defining
how much work is too much is a difficult task because many factors are
involved, such as the person’s training experience and genetics, general
recommendations can be made. Typically doing more than 20 sets per muscle
group for an extended period can lead to overtraining. In addition, doing more
than 40 sets per workout, even when multiple muscle groups are trained in that
workout, can lead to overtraining if done too frequently or if proper nutrition is
not being followed.

As for any other acute variables of training, the number of sets should be
manipulated to prevent stagnation of training adaptations. The most important
variable of training that influences the number of sets that should be performed
is intensity (the amount of weight lifted). The greater the intensity, the greater
the stress placed on the muscle, and thus the lower the number of sets that should
be performed. Therefore, the total number of sets in a training cycle should vary
inversely with training intensity. In fact, training with too many total sets can be
detrimental to the adaptations of strength training and lead to overtraining.


                                Resistance
The term intensity refers to the amount of weight lifted (or resistance used) on a
particular set. Alternatively, many bodybuilders use intensity to refer to the
difficulty of a set or a workout, regardless of the amount of weight used. For
example, a bodybuilder may perform a high-intensity set involving very light
weight at extremely high repetitions until muscle failure is reached. The intensity
of that set would be even higher if the spotter helped the bodybuilder get three
extra forced reps at the end of that set. However, according to the formal
definition of intensity, that set would be categorized as low intensity. Therefore,
to avoid confusion, the term resistance will be used when referring to the amount
of weight used.

The resistance used is one of the most important variables in a training program,
ranking second only to exercise choice. The amount of resistance used for a set
is inversely related to the number of repetitions performed. That is, the heavier
the weight, the fewer the repetitions that can be performed. One of the most
common ways that resistance is measured is through the use of a percentage of
the repetition maximum (RM). For example, an exercise can be prescribed at 80
percent of the individual’s 1RM.

If, for instance, the person’s 1RM on the bench press is 300 pounds (136
kilograms), then

                         300 pounds × .80 = 240 pounds

Using this method does require frequent 1RM testing to ensure that accurate
training resistance is used. This method may be desirable for certain strength
athletes because recurrent testing is a commonly used measure of an athlete’s
progress and a predictor of preparedness for competition. Olympic weightlifters
should use this method regularly because of the skill component required for that
type of lifting. Competitive weightlifters must use precisely measured resistance
for their training phases. Powerlifters also commonly use this method because
the defining moment in their sport is the amount of weight they can perform at
1RM on the bench press, squat, and deadlift. However, many top powerlifters
train with percentages that are based on the 1RM they are predicting to lift in
competition. The down side to prescribing exercise intensity with RM
percentages is the fact that the amount of reps you can perform at a certain
percentage of 1RM can vary depending on experience, the muscle group being
trained, and the exercise equipment used.

For bodybuilders and other fitness enthusiasts, frequent testing of 1RM is not
convenient or often feasible. It would be too time consuming because of the
larger number of exercises they typically use. In addition, many of the exercises
they perform are not conducive to 1RM testing. Although charts are devised for
estimating 1RM based on the number of reps that can be completed at a certain
weight, these are far from accurate. For serious weight trainers, an RM target
zone is the easiest way to monitor training resistance. This is depicted as 10RM
or 5RM and refers to a resistance that limits them to that number of repetitions.
As their strength increases, they simply move to a heavier weight but shoot for
the same RM goal. This allows them to continually stay in the repetition range
they are shooting for without the need to test their 1RM. Worth mentioning here
is that many strength coaches and strength training scientists suggest that
repetitions (resistance) should be kept in a fairly small range for any given
workout. They believe that muscle can be trained for only one goal in any acute
situation. Yet bodybuilders often train with a wide range of repetitions in a single
workout. For example, they may do one set of an exercise with a very heavy
weight for 5 to 7 reps and follow it with another set with light weight for reps in
the 15 to 20 range.

A more recently developed method of prescribing and monitoring resistance
involves the use of the OMNI-resistance exercise scale (Robertson et al. 2003;
Robertson 2004). This is a 10-point subjective scale (see figure 2.1) that is a
modified version of the rating of perceived exertion (RPE) scale that was
originally described by Borg (1982) and used mostly for monitoring aerobic
exercise. Each value from 1 to 10 on the OMNI represents approximately a 10
percent increase in repetition maximum. For example, the use of 100 percent of
a person’s 1RM elicits a rating of 10 on the OMNI-resistance exercise scale,
while the use of 50 percent of the person’s 1RM corresponds to a rating of 5 on
the scale. The OMNI-resistance exercise scale is not a precise quantitative scale
but more a qualitative scale that determines how hard the weight feels to the
lifter. For this reason, it is best used by trainers who are prescribing strength
training to inexperienced lifters.
                       Figure 2.1 OMNI-resistance exercise scale.




 Reprinted from R.J. Robertson, 2004, Perceived exertion for practitioners: Rating effort with the OMNI
          picture system (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics), 49, with permission of the author.

Today, thanks to the many years of trial and error by athletes and the numerous
research studies to confirm the original inclinations, it is now well established
that using certain resistance intensities provides corresponding results. This
information can be used in designing a repetition maximum continuum as seen
in figure 2.2. This figure is a modification of the continuum devised by Fleck
and Kraemer (2004) that is recognized as the most acceptable by exercise
scientists and strength coaches. The continuum in figure 2.2 ranges in maximal
repetitions from 1 to 25, as does the original, but adds the adaptation of muscle
hypertrophy. On the lower end of the continuum, strength gains are more
pronounced, particularly when using maximal repetitions in the range of 1 to 6,
or about 80 to 100 percent of 1RM (O’Shea 1966; Weiss, Coney, and Clark
1999). Enhanced muscle hypertrophy is most notable when training with
repetition maximums in the 8 to 12 range, which corresponds to about 70 to 80
percent 1RM (Kraemer, Fleck, and Evans 1996). And muscular endurance
benefits occur when repetition maximums of 12 and above, or 70 percent of
1RM and below, are used (Stone and Coulter 1994). New evidence also suggests
that these higher rep ranges are also effective for muscle hypertrophy as long as
sets are taken to muscle failure (Burd 2010; Burd 2011; Mitchell 2012). These
varied muscle adaptations underscore the importance of periodization for
producing the most desirable changes in a muscle, whether the person’s goal is
increasing muscle endurance or increasing maximal strength. This is because
each adaptation is related to the others. For example, increasing both maximal
strength and muscle endurance beneficially affects muscle hypertrophy. So while
the person should spend the majority of training time using the repetition range
that best fits his or her major goals, the periodic cycling of other intensities will
enhance this goal.
                    Figure 2.2 Continuum of repetition maximums.



Modified from S.J. Fleck and W.J. Kraemer, Designing resistance training programs, 3rd ed. (Champaign,
                                      IL: Human Kinetics), 167.

One major assumption that the continuum of repetition maximums makes is that
all repetitions are performed at a moderate speed. Yet the speed of a rep can be
increased or decreased, particularly at light to moderate loads. And this change
in speed will dramatically alter the muscle adaptations. In general, fast repetition
speeds with very light weight are best for building speed strength, or power,
when few repetitions are performed. In contrast, slow to moderate repetitions
with a submaximal weight are better for producing adaptations in muscle
endurance and hypertrophy as the time the muscle is under tension is increased.
As an example, using a weight that is about 30 to 45 percent of 1RM to do three
reps as fast as possible builds speed strength (power) and has little effect if any
on muscle hypertrophy or endurance.


                      Rest Period Between Sets
How long a weightlifter should rest between sets is dependent on numerous
factors. These include the resistance being used, the goals of the lifter, and the
metabolic pathways that need to be trained. The general consensus is that the
lower the reps being performed (that is, the higher the resistance intensity), the
longer the rest periods that should be taken. And so as the periodized routine
alters resistance intensity, so too do the rest periods change accordingly.

If a person is training for maximal strength or power, he or she should take long
rest periods between sets. This is because lifting heavy weight for low reps
requires energy derived from anaerobic metabolism, called the ATP-PC
(adenosine triphosphate-phosphocreatine) system. This metabolic pathway
provides the immediate energy required for lifting heavy weight or performing
explosive movements for a short period. This system requires more than 3
minutes of rest for the majority of recovery to occur. Therefore, the
recommendation is to rest at least 3 to more than 5 minutes when training for
maximal strength or power. The general guidelines are as follows: resistance at
less than 5RM requires over 5 minutes of rest, 5-7RM requires 3-5 minutes, 8-
10RM requires 2-3 minutes, 11-13RM requires 1-2 minutes, and over 13RM
requires about 1 minute (Kraemer 2003). This level of rest ensures that fatigue
will be minimal at the start of a new set, and in turn, strength can be near
maximal. Similarly, if a strength athlete or other athlete performs short bouts of
high-intensity exercise with long rest periods between, the athlete should rest at
least three minutes between sets.

When training for muscle hypertrophy (which is best attained with reps in the
range of 8 to 12), shorter rest periods appear to be the most beneficial. Resting
less than three minutes between sets stresses the anaerobic energy systems, and
this is often recommended for bodybuilding training. This is because fatigue is
believed to play some role in the pathways leading to muscle growth. One
possibility involves lactate, which dramatically increases as reps increase and
rest between sets decreases.

For athletes interested in improving muscle endurance, low intensity (less than
60 percent 1RM), high repetitions of 15 and beyond, and short rest periods
(under one minute) seem to be the best plan. This plan allows them to train to the
point of fatigue and beyond, which enhances the body’s ability to use lactate as
an energy source and even improves aerobic capacity to some degree. Because
fatigue is associated with muscle hypertrophy, many bodybuilders also
frequently use this style of training.

Some styles of training use such minute rest periods between sets that they are
classified in gym circles as using “no rest” between sets. This means that you
would take no deliberate rest but instead immediately move to the next exercise.
Such training methods include circuit training and the various forms of superset
training, which includes compound sets, triple sets, and giant sets (see chapter 6
for more detailed explanations of these methods). With each of these methods, a
certain number of sets of different exercises are done back to back with no rest
between exercise sets. Only after you complete the prescribed number of
exercises (which can vary from 2 to as many as 12) would you take a rest period.
Then you would repeat the cycle anywhere from one to five times depending on
the program.


                        Additional Factors
The five original acute training variables discussed earlier were classified and
organized decades ago. As with any science, progress has been made to further
our understanding of resistance training. Besides determining the best exercises
to use, the correct order of those exercises, the proper resistance to use, the
optimal number of sets to do, and the right amount of rest to take between sets,
other factors are to be considered.

Another acute training variable that can be added to the list is repetition speed,
or rep tempo. Generally speaking, typical rep speed in strength training lasts
about two to three seconds to complete the positive (concentric) and negative
(eccentric) portions of each rep. This is considered a controlled pace and is the
pace taught by most strength coaches and personal trainers. However, some
programs rely on the manipulation of rep speed. Speeding up the time it takes to
complete a rep—in the range of one second or less—has been shown to be an
effective way to increase muscle power. See Ballistic Strength Training in
chapter 9 for an explanation of how to train with fast, explosive reps. Some
strength training experts also believe that slowing down a rep—in the range of
10 to 20 seconds—can enhance muscle endurance as well as size. Research in
this area is limited, but anecdotal reports are positive. See Slow-Repetition
Training in chapter 6 for an explanation of how to train using very slow reps,
and see Speed-Set Training in chapter 6 as well.

Another factor you should also be concerned about is how frequently you train.
The frequency at which muscle groups are trained can be more critical than any
of the acute variables of training discussed previously. The reason has to do with
recovery. It is generally accepted that you should wait until a muscle has
recovered from a previous workout before training the muscle again. Muscle
recovery, however, is an individual thing that is influenced by factors such as
lifting experience, intensity of the workout, and total volume. In most instances
it is best to get 2 to 7 days of rest for each muscle group. This will be determined
by how you split your training. Training splits refer to how you break down
training days. For example, do you train your whole body during every workout,
or do you train only one or two muscle groups each workout? For obvious
reasons, the more workouts it takes you to train all the major muscle groups of
the body, the more rest you will take between workouts for the same muscle
group. Training splits and training frequency are discussed in more detail in
chapters 5 and 8.


                                 Summary
The design of every workout is a critical component of the design of the strength
training program. Regardless of your goal, you must carefully select appropriate
acute variables to optimize the adaptations that occur in every workout. In
designing the most effective training programs to reach your goals, you must
carefully consider the choice of exercises and the order, intensity used, number
of sets performed, and rest periods between sets. In addition to these variables,
you may want to consider the speed at which you perform your reps. Last but not
least is the frequency at which you train muscle groups. This basic information
in this chapter will make more sense after you read about training details in parts
II, III, and IV.
                          Chapter 3
                        Training Cycles
The term periodization refers to the systematic manipulation of the acute
variables of training (as discussed in chapter 2) over a period that may range
from days to years. The original concept was developed in the former Eastern
Bloc countries in the late 1950s to optimize athletes’ adaptations to resistance
training. More important, periodization revolves around the athlete’s competitive
calendar so that he or she is at a competitive peak for competition.

The basis of periodization is general adaptation syndrome (GAS), which
describes three stages that an organism—such as an athlete—goes through when
exposed to a novel stress (Selye 1936). As a new stress is placed on the body
(for example, heavy training in the range of three to five reps), the muscle first
goes through an alarm reaction. During this stage the athlete momentarily gets
weaker. But with continued exposure to the stress (successive workouts), the
body enters the stage of adaptation. In this stage the body supercompensates for
the stress—such as increasing muscle strength—to better deal with the stress. If
the body is continually exposed to the same stress for too long, it may enter the
stage of exhaustion, where its adaptation to the stress may actually decline. This
may mean that the strength gains the athlete made during the adaptation stage
will cease, and stagnation may set in. It may even lead to an actual decline in
strength. Although this theory is now considered a simplistic take on the body’s
response to stress, it does hold true and explains the reason periodization is so
important for proper adaptation to strength training.

You must expose the muscle to any one training style for just long enough to
reap the benefits but avoid a nosedive of those positive adaptations. At this stage
a new training style should be introduced, and the cycle continues. A simplistic
take on periodization is the maxim of “everything works, but nothing works
forever.” This is a major theme of this book and is the reason it offers so many
training methods. Having a large arsenal of training methods (as provided in
chapters 6 and 9) to use for short periods and continually cycling them in a
systematic order will prevent stagnation and maximize training adaptations.

The three periodization schemes most commonly used by strength coaches,
which are the three most extensively researched, are classic strength and power
periodization, reverse linear periodization, and undulating periodization.
Although there are many other more obscure periodization schemes out there, a
discussion including these three will cover the premise behind periodization.
Regardless of the exact plan, periodized strength training programs have been
shown through research to be significantly more effective than nonperiodized
programs for increasing strength, power, and athletic performance in both men
and women (Kraemer et al. 2003; Marx et al. 2001; Rhea and Alderman 2004;
Willoughby 1993).


                     Classic Periodization
The name implies that this system is the hallmark periodization scheme most
associated with the term periodization. In its most general form, classic
periodization divides a long-term training period called the macrocycle (which
typically involves six months to one year but may be up to four years, such as
with Olympic athletes) into smaller phases called mesocycles (usually lasting
several weeks to months), which are also subdivided into weekly microcycles .
The strength training progresses over the macrocycle from low resistance
(intensity) to high intensity with total volume following the opposite
progression, from high to low. A schematic overview of the classic strength and
power periodization scheme can be seen in figure 3.1 and table 3.1.
            Figure 3.1 Classic strength and power periodization scheme.




Adapted, by permission, from S.J. Fleck and W.J. Kraemer, Designing resistance training programs, 3rd ed.
                                (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics), 213.
  Adapted from M.H. Stone, H. O’Bryant, and J. Garhammer, 1981, “A hypothetical model for strength
              training,” Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness 21(4): 342-351.

Figure 3.1 represents the most common periodization format used for increasing
strength and power. The first phase, or mesocycle, is classified as the
hypertrophy phase and is categorized as being low intensity. Reps are around 8
to 12 and sometimes as high as 20. It is considered very high in volume because
sets are usually in the range of 4 to 5 for each exercise. The goal of this phase is
typically to prepare the athlete for the high-intensity training that is to follow.
The muscle hypertrophy experienced in this phase will enhance the gains in
strength and power an athlete will make in the later stages. Although this is
termed the hypertrophy phase, it should not be confused with a periodized
program a bodybuilder would use. Hypertrophy is the main goal in a
bodybuilding program, not something an athlete may do only for several months.
In some periodized programs designed for athletes, the hypertrophy phase may
be preceded by what is known as a general preparedness (GP) phase. This is
especially true if the person being trained is a rank beginner or an athlete who is
returning after an off-season where little, if any, training took place. This would
provide a means of preparing an athlete for the hypertrophy phase with very low
intensity and moderate-to high-volume training.
The next mesocycle is usually the strength phase. As the name implies, the
major goal during this phase is to maximize muscle strength. This phase is
typically moderate to high in intensity with reps in the range of two to six and
the goal to build up muscle strength. It’s somewhat high in volume, with three or
four sets performed per exercise and fewer total exercises performed per muscle
group than during the hypertrophy phase. Following the strength phase is the
power phase. It is similar to the strength phase in that the intensity is high (reps
are in the range of two to three). The volume is a bit lower; sets usually are about
three per exercise. The point of this phase is to start transferring the strength
gains made during the first two phases into more explosive power that serves
well for competition.

The final two mesocycles prepare the athlete for competition. The peaking phase
follows the power phase. It is categorized by low volume (only one to three sets
per exercise are formed) and very high intensity (reps as low as one per set).
This phase gets the athlete ready for competition by maximizing strength and
power. After this phase, the athlete drops the strength training and undergoes a
period of active rest just before competition. The active rest phase is categorized
by activity other than strength training such as swimming, hiking, or sport
activities like basketball and tennis. This phase usually lasts for only about one
to two weeks before a competition to allow the body to recover from all the
strenuous training so that it can perform at its best. After competition, this phase
may actually continue for several weeks before the periodized training scheme
starts again. For this reason, the active rest phase is often referred to as the
transition phase. Most strength experts using the classic strength and power
periodization program will continue the mesocycle phases for anywhere from
three weeks to three months. However, a compressed version of this program
would involve changing the phases (hence the intensity and volume) every week.
Then the cycle repeats itself.

Although classic strength periodization schemes can allow for adaptations in
strength training, some issues need to be considered with these models. The first
consideration is the fact that the higher-volume training phase may lead to
fatigue if followed consecutively for too long. This could be a problem for
athletes who must compete at various times throughout the year. The second
consideration is the fact that the muscle hypertrophy gained during the
hypertrophy phase may not be maintained very well during the later stages,
where volume gets considerably low. This could be a problem for bodybuilders
and other athletes who are concerned about muscle mass. Therefore, other
periodized schemes have been developed and tested in the gym as well as in the
lab.


               Reverse Linear Periodization
Reverse linear periodization takes the classic strength and power periodization
scheme and runs it backward. Whereas the goal of the classic periodization
model is to maximize an athlete’s strength and power, the goal of the reverse
linear model is to maximize muscle hypertrophy or endurance strength,
depending on the rep range that the program concludes with (8 to 12 for
hypertrophy and 20 to 30 for endurance strength). Research supports the concept
that the reverse linear periodization scheme is more effective for increasing
endurance strength than the classic model (Rhea et al. 2003).

In essence, the reverse linear model starts with the power phase, where intensity
is very high (two or three reps per set) and volume is low (three sets per
exercise). The peaking phase is usually skipped because the athlete is not
preparing for a competition in which power and strength matter. After the athlete
follows the power phase for several weeks, the strength phase starts. Again, the
strength phase uses moderate to high intensity (two to six reps per set) and
slightly higher volume than the power phase (three or four sets per exercise).
The goal of these first two phases is to build the strength and power to optimize
gains in mass or endurance strength.

Being able to lift heavier weight for the desired number of reps during the
hypertrophy phase can result in significant gains in muscle mass as well as
muscle endurance. The hypertrophy stage comes last in the program and
involves lower intensity (8 to 12 reps per set) and high volume, which is the best
prescription for building muscle mass. This stage is a good systematic approach
to gaining muscle mass, which makes it a smart periodized plan for
bodybuilders. See figure 3.2 for a sample reverse linear periodization scheme for
muscle hypertrophy.
        Figure 3.2 Reverse linear periodization scheme for hypertrophy.




To make the reverse linear model a better fit for optimizing endurance strength,
the power phase can be eliminated. That means it would start with the strength
phase, then move to the hypertrophy phase, then move to an endurance phase
(where the reps are in the range of 20 to 30), and finally move to an active rest
phase if the athlete is training for a competition. A diagram of this model is
shown in figure 3.3. As with any periodization scheme, the acute variables can
be manipulated within each stage to improve the result of the program. For
instance, a reverse linear model can start with reps in the 8 to 10 range, then
progress to the range of 12 to 15, and end in the range of 20 to 30.
    Figure 3.3 Reverse linear periodization scheme for endurance strength.




                  Undulating Periodization
As the name implies, undulating periodization follows a less linear scheme than
does the classic strength (power) scheme or the reverse linear periodization
scheme. Undulating models are gaining in popularity in strength rooms because
of their convenience and effectiveness.

Undulating periodization schemes typically follow a 14-day mesocycle with
three or four different workouts to stagger (see table 3.2). This way, instead of
sticking with one training phase for several weeks or more, the lifter can change
intensity and volume from one workout to another. For example, if the lifter
were following a whole-body training split, he or she might perform the strength
workout on Monday, the endurance strength workout on Wednesday, and the
hypertrophy workout on Friday. The following week the lifter may train the
endurance strength workout on Monday, the hypertrophy workout on
Wednesday, and the strength workout on Friday. If the lifter trained the upper
body on Mondays and Thursdays and the lower body on Tuesdays and Fridays,
he or she might then do hypertrophy workouts on Monday and Tuesday and
strength workouts on Thursday and Friday. The following week the lifter might
train with endurance workouts on Monday and Tuesday and strength workouts
on Thursday and Friday. After the two-week mesocycle the lifter could switch
back to a different workout and perform the mesocycle over again, or the lifter
can take a week off (especially if a competition is scheduled) and then return to
the 14-day mesocycle.
One of the great things about undulating periodization is that it requires less
organization and planning than linear periodized programs require. For instance,
if a person felt tired or sick (or conversely, the person felt exceptionally
motivated and strong one day), the workout could be changed for that day to
better suit mood and physical health. Or if scheduling was a problem and the
lifter was short on time one day, he or she could switch to a workout with lower
volume. Although it seems that such a training system that requires little
planning would be less effective than a program that is scheduled months in
advance, research has found that undulating periodized programs are just as
effective as linear periodized models for the development of strength, power, and
muscle mass (Marx et al. 2001; Kraemer et al. 2000) and are more effective than
nonperiodized programs. One study by Rhea, Ball, Phillips, and Burkett (2002)
found that undulating periodized training was more effective for developing
strength compared to a linear periodized plan.

In actuality, the sporadic nature of the undulating program works as a default for
building muscle, strength, and power. That’s because periodization is based on
the fact that a physiological system makes adaptations to a stress that it is
exposed to. Yet if the system is exposed to the stress for too long, the adaptations
will plateau and even reverse to some degree. Given that, the undulating
periodized scheme allows the stress (strength training) to be encountered for
very short periods before it is changed and then cycled back in. In this model,
the different types of strength training (heavy, light, fast, or whatever) are cycled
repeatedly from day to day. So it helps to keep the muscle from getting used to
the stimulus, yet it exposes it frequently enough to cause progressive
adaptations.
                              Microcycles
With the classic linear periodization model and the reverse linear periodization
model, sticking with the same rep range for a full mesocycle, which can last
many weeks, can have some drawbacks. Some athletes get bored using the same
rep ranges for several weeks. Another issue discussed earlier is the fact that
some of the adaptations made in a previous mesocycle may be lost in a later
mesocycle. For example, gains in muscle size made during the hypertrophy
phase may be lost during the strength and power phases where repetitions
performed each set rarely exceed 6.

Undulating periodization is one way to remedy the issues of the mesocycles.
However, using a linear model, whether it is the classic linear scheme or the
reverse linear scheme, has merit. Microcycles may be an even more effective
way of using linearly periodized training schemes.

The term microcycle refers to weekly changes in the weight used and reps
performed. For example, if following the classic linear model, week 1 might be a
muscle endurance microcycle with reps of 12 to 15. Week 2 might be the
hypertrophy microcycle with reps of 8 to 12. Week 3 continues increasing the
weight and decreasing the reps for the strength microcycle with reps of 4 to 6.
Then in week 4, which could be the power microcycle, reps drop again to just 2
or 3 per set. After week 4, the cycle repeats itself with week 5 returning to the
muscle endurance microcycle. These microcycles can keep repeating in this
order until the athlete is ready for competition, or for a noncompetitive strength
trainer, the program is over after 12 weeks or so. See table 3.3 for a sample
linear scheme that uses microcycles. This is very similar to the Shortcut to Size
(Micromuscle) program that has gained great popularity online due to the
extraordinary gains in muscle size and strength that are possible with this 12-
week program. For more details on this program, see chapter 7.
             Combining Periodized Schemes
There is no rule that states that you have to pick one and only one form of
periodization and follow it until the end of the program. A great way to increase
muscle size and strength is to use programs that combine periodization models.

A good example of this is pendulum training. In pendulum training, you start off
using a classic linear periodization model usually with microcycles. Therefore,
you might start with reps in the range of 8 to 12 in week 1. Then in week 2, reps
drop to 6 to 8. In week 3, reps drop again to 3 to 5. In week 4, the order switches
to a reverse linear periodization model with reps going back up to the 6-to-8
range and then in week 5 to the 8-to-12 range. Then in week 6 it is back to a
linear progression with reps dropping to 6 to 8 reps. The program would
continue swinging back and forth like this similar to a pendulum—hence the
name. See table 3.4 for a sample pendulum scheme.
Another way to combine periodization models is to use both linear and reverse
linear models simultaneously. This works well with a program that trains each
muscle group twice per week. For example, with a program that uses a two-day
split with chest, back, and shoulders trained in workouts 1 and 3 and legs and
arms trained in workouts 2 and 4, workouts 1 and 2 could follow a linear order
using a microcycle system of increasing weight and decreasing reps with each
week. Weeks 3 and 4 could follow a reverse linear order using a microcycle
system in which the weight decreases and the reps increase each week. See table
3.5 for an example of this scheme. What’s interesting when you consider the
order of the rep ranges with two separate rep ranges being used each week is that
the scheme is similar to an undulating periodization model. Here workouts 1 and
2 progress from 9 to 11 reps in week 1, to 6 to 8 reps in week 2, and to 3 to 5
reps in week 3. Workouts 3 and 4 start at 12 to 15 reps in week 1, then jump to
16 to 20 reps in week 2, and finally go to 21 to 30 reps in week 3. But when you
consider the order from workouts 1 and 2 to workouts 3 and 4 each week, the
reps actually go in this order: 9 to 11, 12 to 15, 6 to 8, 16 to 20, 3 to 5, 21 to 30.
It is actually an undulating order. This is very similar to my Shortcut to Shred (1-
2-3 Lean) program that has gained a lot of popularity online because it allows
trainees to build significant strength and size despite the fact that they are
drastically reducing body fat. See chapter 13 for more details on this program.
    Adapted from J. Stoppani, 2013, Jim Stoppani’s six-week shortcut to shred. [Online]. Available:
    www.bodybuilding.com/fun/jim-stoppani-six-week-shortcut-to-shred.html [September 4, 2014].



                      Types of Training Cycles
Periodization is a term used by strength coaches, experts, and athletes who have
been educated on the matter. Rarely will you hear the term used in the gym by
bodybuilders or powerlifters. These athletes refer to the concept of periodization
as cycling. It may sound cooler, but cycling is just a simpler term for
periodization. Although the minor details of cycling for powerlifters and
bodybuilders are slightly different from the three periodized schemes discussed
previously, they rely on the same premise: Change is good.

Powerlifters use several types of cycles to prepare for a competition. A multitude
of these are presented in chapters 9 and 10. The most common cycle uses a
gradual increase in the amount of weight used over time. Usually this starts out
as low as 50 percent of the lifter’s 1RM and progresses up to 100 percent of the
1RM weight for that lift over a 6-to 12-week period. See table 3.6 for a sample
11-week powerlifting cycle.
Bodybuilders also use numerous cycling strategies. In fact, an unlimited number
of bodybuilding cycles could be used. These are covered in chapters 6 and 7.
The most common ones used are similar to the reverse linear periodization
scheme (table 3.7) and the undulating periodization scheme (table 3.8). Although
these athletes mix up their training frequently, the focus tends to stay on reps in
the moderate to high range (8 to 20). Occasionally, these athletes train with
heavy weight and low reps, but these phases are short and infrequent.
                                Summary
Regardless of whether the goal is to increase power and strength or muscle
growth, periodization (or cycling) is a necessary method for making continual
progress. Only by cycling the training phases is it possible to keep the muscles
adapting and prevent them from stagnating. Fortunately, numerous periodization
methods can be employed. These include classic linear periodized schemes,
reverse linear schemes, and undulating schemes. So while any one periodization
scheme will provide sufficient variability in the training program, using different
periodization schemes promotes training variability and progress. Over time you
should try them all to decide what scheme works best for you. From there, you
can choose to use that cycle as your primary scheme or frequently change up
your cycles as you should for acute variables of training. You can even combine
periodized schemes into one training program, such as with pendulum training.
                  Chapter 4
         Strength Training Equipment
There is an abundance of equipment that you can use for the purpose of strength
training. Although some of these pieces of equipment are more complicated or
sophisticated than others, all have their advantages and disadvantages.
Regardless of how simple or innovative, most strength training devices fall into
one of three categories: those that provide constant resistance throughout the
range of motion, those that provide variable resistance (whether controlled or
not) throughout the range of motion, and those that provide a constant speed
throughout the entire range of motion. In addition, some novel pieces of strength
training equipment do not fit into the standard categories, such as vibration. This
chapter covers the more common forms of strength training equipment as well as
some that are not so common.


                         Simple Resistance
The first category of strength training equipment provides constant resistance
throughout the entire range of motion. This is the simplest form of resistance and
is composed of little more than objects that provide weight. The mass of the
object, whether it be a dumbbell or a weight stack, provides resistance through
gravity. Any time you attempt to pick up a free object, you are fighting the force
of gravity, which pulls the object to the ground. The type of contraction that the
muscle goes through when lifting a free object is termed isotonic. It literally
means same tone or tension, because the weight stays the same while you lift it.
If the object is too heavy to move, the type of contraction the muscle goes
through is isometric. Because the mass of any object can be used in this manner,
this category of strength training equipment is the largest and is composed of the
widest range of equipment.

Free Weights
The term free weights refers to equipment moved in the performance of an
exercise, which is simply raised and lowered as a complete unit. It is called free
weight because the weight is free to move in any direction and in any manner.
Technically, any object can be considered free weight; however, the term usually
refers to the weight plates and barbell or dumbbell systems and related items
found in home and commercial gyms.
barbell—The bar that weight plates are loaded onto for purposes of strength
   training. Barbells normally measure between five and seven feet in length,
   depending on the type of barbell. There are several different types of barbells:
Olympic barbell—A special type of barbell used in Olympic weightlifting and in
   powerlifting competitions as well as in gyms (see figure 4.1). These bars
   weigh 20 kilograms (just under 45 pounds) and are seven feet in length. The
   ends of the bar are two inches (five centimeters) in diameter to fit Olympic
   weight plates, and the handle section where you grab the bar is one inch (two
   and a half centimeters) in diameter. Parts of the handle section are knurled for
   better gripping. Some gyms have shorter versions of these bars.
  Figure 4.1    Standard bar and plates (left) contrasted with Olympic bar and
                                 plates (right).




standard barbell—Similar to Olympic barbells in that the gripping portion is
   usually one inch in diameter and knurled in sections. However, these barbells
   have ends that are one inch in diameter to fit standard weight plates.
fixed barbell—A barbell with a predetermined weight (see figure 4.2).
                      Figure 4.2     Fixed barbells on a rack.




EZ curl bar—A special type of barbell that is bent at several points so that it
  looks like a stretched-out W (see figure 4.3). This allows the user to have a
  grip that is somewhere between a fully supinated grip (underhand grip) and a
  neutral grip. The purpose of this is to take stress off the wrists as well as place
  more stress on the long head of the biceps (outer biceps). An EZ curl bar is
  occasionally called a cambered curling bar.
                     Figure 4.3    Curls with an EZ curl bar.




fat bar—A special barbell or dumbbell that is larger in diameter on the gripping
   portion of the bar than the conventional bars that are one inch in diameter. Fat
   bars usually come in two-inch and sometimes three-inch (five-or eight-
   centimeter) diameters. Training with fat bars allows users to develop greater
   grip strength than they would by using a standard one-inch bar. However,
   research has shown that using fat bars on pulling exercises, such as deadlifts,
   rows and curls can limit the weight used on those exercises, which could
   interfere with strength and muscle hypertrophy gains of the target muscle.
safety squat bar—A bar that resembles a barbell with two short padded bars
   (about 12 inches, or 30 centimeters) that run perpendicular to the bar from the
   middle. These padded bars rest on the shoulders and allow the user to grab
   them as a handle while squatting (see figure 4.4).
                 Figure 4.4    Squatting with a safety squat bar.




trap bar—A weight bar with a diamond-shaped or hexagon section in the
   middle. During the exercise, the lifter stands inside the diamond and grips the
   transverse handholds on either side of the diamond. This type of bar is
   sometimes called a hex bar, due to its shape, and is typically used for shrugs
   and deadlifts (see figure 4.5).
                             Figure 4.5    Trap bar.



weight plates—The round steel plates that add weight to barbells and plate-
   loaded weight machines. There are generally two types of weight plates, but
   regardless of the type of weight plate, these are commonly available in
   weights of 1.25, 2.5, 5, 10, 25, 35, 45, and even 100 pounds:
Olympic weight plates—These plates have center holes that are 2-1/8 inches
   (about 5.4 centimeters) in diameter to fit on Olympic barbells.
standard weight plates—These plates have center holes that are about 1-1/8
   inches (about 3 centimeters) in diameter to fit on a 1-inch standard bar.
bumper plates—An Olympic weight plate with a rubber outer rim and/or coating
   to reduce damage to the floor and the weight plate in the event that it is
   dropped. These are most commonly used in Olympic weightlifting where very
   heavy weights are lifted overhead and then dropped.
collar—The clamp used to hold plates securely in place on a barbell or
   adjustable dumbbell. The collars used in powerlifting and Olympic
   weightlifting weigh 5.5 pounds (2.5 kilograms).
dumbbell—A short-handled barbell intended primarily for use with one hand. It
   is usually about 8 to 12 inches (20 to 30 centimeters) in total length; the
   knurled gripping portion is about 6 inches (15 centimeters) on most
   dumbbells. Some dumbbells are solid steel with round or hexagon ends, while
   others use weight plates and can be adjusted to different weights.

Specialty Free-Weight Objects

Some free-weight objects don’t fall under the typical category of dumbbell or
barbell. These unique objects provide weight for many conventional and
unconventional exercises.
medicine ball—A weighted leather or rubber ball that varies in size from that of
  a volleyball to a basketball, depending on the weight (2 to 30 pounds, or 0.9 to
  14 kilograms). Medicine balls can be used for throwing exercises or to
  simulate most typical exercises done with barbells or dumbbells (see figure
  4.6).
                    Figure 4.6    Throwing a medicine ball.




kettlebell—This cast-iron free weight resembles a cannonball with a solid handle
  welded to it. Kettlebells come in weights as low as 15 pounds to as high as 50
  (about 7 to 23 kilograms), usually in 5-or 10-pound increments. They can be
  used for a variety of exercises but are mainly used for performing swings,
  snatches, and cleans.
head harness—A leather or nylon head strap that has a chain attached from one
  side to the other. Weight plates are added to the chain and the device is worn
  on the head to provide resistance for neck-strengthening exercises (see figure
  4.7).
               Figure 4.7    Neck extensions with a head harness.




weighted belt—This equipment resembles a short weight belt that fits around the
  small of the back along with a long chain that runs from one side of the belt to
  the other. Weight plates are added to the chain and supported around the waist
  for adding resistance during body-weight exercises such as dips and pull-ups.
weight vest—This device is simply a nylon vest with pockets that hold 1-to 2-
  pound weights. Total weight usually adjusts between 2 and 40 pounds (0.9 to
  18 kilograms), although a few extreme vests go up to 80 pounds or more. This
  is often used to increase the weight on body-weight exercises such as push-
  ups as well as bounding and running exercises.
sand bags—These devices are typically made of canvas, leather or neoprene and
  are filled with sand or steel bee bees. This creates a weighted device that
  changes the distribution of the weight depending on how you hold it and move
  it.
wrist roller—This device is simply composed of a short steel or wooden handle
  with a three-to four-foot (91-to 122-centimeter) rope attached to it (see figure
  4.8). On the other end of the rope weights are attached. To train the forearm
  flexors, a lifter would roll the handle with a forward motion to lift the weight
  from the floor until the rope is completely wrapped around the handle. To
  train the forearm extensors, the lifter would roll the handle in a reverse
  motion.
                   Figure 4.8    Wrist curls with a wrist roller.




arm blaster—This aluminum device is used to prevent movement of the upper
  arms when doing biceps curls. It has straps that suspend it from the shoulders
  so that it sits firmly against the waist allowing the backs of the arms to press
  against the arm blaster while the lifter performs curls (see figure 4.9).
                 Figure 4.9    Barbell curls with an arm blaster.




land mine—This device is a weighted plate (many look like home plate on a
   baseball diamond) that holds a sleeve that fits the end of a barbell. The sleeve
   is connected to the base with a number of free moving joints that allow the
   barbell to be rotated from the free end to work the core muscles, as well as the
   lower body and upper body muscles (see figure 4.10).
                            Figure 4.10     Land mine.




Free-Weight Accessories

Besides the resistance component of strength training with free-weight objects,
many exercises require the use of various benches and racks to support the lifter
and the free weight.
weight benches—Various benches are used along with free weights and are
   specifically designed for certain barbell exercises. These weight benches have
   supports for barbells to allow the lifter to easily rack the barbell at the end of
   the set. Following are some types of benches:
bench-press bench—A horizontal bench with vertical barbell supports.
incline bench-press bench—A bench that is angled up at about 35 to 45 degrees
   from the floor so that when a lifter sits on it the head is higher than the hips.
   The bench is welded to a steel structure that has vertical barbell supports and a
   step platform for a spotter to watch over the lifter performing the incline
   bench press exercise.
decline bench-press bench—A bench that angles down about 30 to 40 degrees so
   that the head is lower than the feet. There are barbell supports for doing
   decline barbell bench presses.
shoulder press bench—A bench that has a padded seat and vertical seat back so
   that when the lifter sits on it the torso is vertical, as it should be when doing
   the barbell shoulder press exercise. The bench is welded to a steel structure
   that has vertical barbell supports that sit behind the lifter’s head so that he or
   she can easily grab the bar at the start of the set and can rack it without
   stressing the shoulder joint at the end of the set.
preacher bench—A bench that has a seat and a padded armrest that is angled at
   about 45 degrees to the floor and set in front of the lifter. In front of the
   armrest is a barbell support. The lifter sits on the seat with the upper arms
   supported on the armrest and performs biceps curls.
free-standing benches—Some benches do not have barbell supports because they
   are used mainly with dumbbells. These benches consist of just the padded
   bench and leg supports and include the following:
flat bench—A fixed horizontal bench that is used for seated or lying exercises
   that are performed prone or supine.
adjustable-incline bench—A bench that allows the angle of the surface to be
   adjusted from horizontal to vertical with various points in between.
adjustable-decline bench—A bench that angles down at varying degrees so that
   the head is lower than the feet. This is often used for chest and abdominal
   exercises.
low-back bench—A bench that has a short horizontal seat and a low vertical
   back pad to support the back during exercises such as overhead presses and
   triceps extensions.
weight rack—A rack that supports a barbell to allow the lifter to grab it from a
   variety of positions. The following are some types of weight racks:
power rack—The most versatile rack is this safety apparatus that is made of four
   vertical steel beams to create a cage that is usually about five feet (one and a
   half meters) long, five feet wide, and seven feet (two meters) tall. The vertical
   beams have holes drilled into them every one to two inches from top to
   bottom. The holes allow the barbell hooks to be adjusted to different heights.
   The holes also fit safety bars that can be used to catch the barbell if the lifter
   fails to lift the weight. Power racks are typically used for squats, shrugs, and
   presses (see figure 4.11a).
squat rack—A steel structure that has barbell-support hooks at different heights
   so that lifters of various statures can easily unrack the barbell to perform the
   squat or other standing exercises. Some squat racks have two horizontal
   beams that are about three feet (91 centimeters) high and run parallel to each
   other off the front of the squat rack. These beams act as a safety rack so that if
   a lifter fails to complete a squat, he or she can rack the weight on the safety
   beam (see figure 4.11b).
 Figure 4.11     (a) Squatting in a power rack contrasted with (b) squatting in a
                                    squat rack.




stability objects—A multitude of objects can provide unstable support. Unlike a
   bench, which has a stable foundation to support the lifter’s body weight,
   stability objects are unstable objects that make an exercise more difficult to
   perform. This helps to develop the strength of the core and stabilizer muscles.
exercise ball—Also known as a stability ball. These inflatable balls come in
several sizes (30 to 85 centimeters in diameter). They offer a platform that
rolls and gives when a person sits or lies on it, making seated or lying
exercises with dumbbells or barbells much more difficult to perform (see
figure 4.12). These can also be used with body-weight exercises such as
crunches and push-ups.
              Figure 4.12     Dumbbell presses on an exercise ball.




BOSU balance trainer—This object resembles the top half of a large exercise
  ball with a solid and stable base. It offers most of the benefits of an exercise
  ball without the rolling, which makes it ideal for building core strength with
  standing exercises (see figure 4.13).
                      Figure 4.13    BOSU balance trainer.




stability disc—Small (about 12 to 14 inches in diameter and 2 to 3 inches in
   height) pancakelike disc made of pliable plastic that a person can stand on or
   sit on while doing strength exercises (see figure 4.14).
                        Figure 4.14   Stability disc.




balance board—A wooden base that has a rounded bottom to provide wobbling
  when stood on. These are sometimes used for performing standing strength
  exercises (see figure 4.15).
                         Figure 4.15    Balance board.




Common Objects
Long before dumbbells and barbells were available, athletes and others needing
to enhance their strength and fitness used a variety of common objects that
served as free weight, such as stones and sacks of sand. Today, although
balanced barbells and dumbbells are available, some people use common objects
(such as food cans or gallon milk jugs) when they don’t have access to standard
free-weight implements or choose to lift awkward and unbalanced objects (such
as stones and beer kegs) to develop more functional strength. Obviously, any
object with mass can be used as a strength training tool—a can of soup, a bucket
of water, or a cement cylinder block. Rocks, logs, and tires are common
implements to be lifted in strongman competitions. The disadvantage to lifting
common objects is the awkwardness. Without a clear handle to grab and without
an even balance of weight, lifting common objects requires more functional
ability than free weights require. But lifting such awkward implements helps to
develop core strength and functional strength.
strongman implements—Strongmen are required to lift a number of awkward
   objects during competition. Most events combine strength and muscle
   endurance by requiring the competitors to outdo each other by lifting such
   objects for the most repetitions or carrying them the most quickly over a
   certain distance. Some common strongmen implements include the following:
Atlas stone—Atlas stones are large, heavy balls made of granite or concrete that
   strongmen must lift and carry in competition. Sizes range from 14 inches to
   more than 60 inches (36 to 152 centimeters) in diameter and weights range
   from about 140 pounds to well over 300 pounds (64 to 136 kilograms).
   Competitors typically must lift progressively heavier Atlas stones from the
   ground and load them onto progressively higher pedestals (up to 60 inches).
   The competitor who completes the task in the least amount of time wins.
logs—These awkward objects are common to strongman competitions. The
   modified ones found in competitions have handles carved into them for easier
   gripping when lifting. These can range in weight from about 200 to well over
   300 pounds (91 to 136 kilograms). The winner is the competitor who lifts the
   heaviest log from the ground to overhead. Aluminum logs are available that
   have Olympic barbell ends to allow Olympic weight plates to be added for
   training with different weights.
tractor tires—These can range in weight from about 500 pounds to more than
   900 pounds (227 to 408 kilograms), depending on the size. In strongman
   competitions the competitor who flips the tire the fastest over a predetermined
   distance is the winner.
training adjuncts—Some common objects are used for enhancing strength in the
   gym or on the playing field. The unique mass characteristics of the object
   (unbalanced weight or progressive weight) offer benefits that free weights
   don’t. Such implements include the following:
chains—Steel chains can be attached to an Olympic bar to provide progressive
   resistance during barbell exercises such as the bench press or squat. The
   unique thing about chains is that as each link lifts off the ground, the weight
   being lifted increases, offering linear variable resistance throughout the range
   of motion. This type of resistance provides greater resistance the further you
   move through the range of motion of an exercise.
beer keg—An empty beer keg weighs approximately 30 pounds (14 kilograms).
   The handles on a beer keg make it easy to grip, but the rotund shape makes it
   awkward to lift and control. Some strength coaches have their football,
   basketball, baseball, and hockey players as well as other athletes lift kegs as a
   way to develop more functional strength.
everyday objects—Objects that are found in most homes can be used in place of
   free weights when free weights are unavailable for standard strength training
   exercises. Some objects commonly used include the following:
soup cans—These can range in weight from 10 ounces to a little over 1 pound
   (.28 to .45 kilogram). Similar to dumbbells, soup cans can be held in the hands
   for almost any exercise that would normally be performed with dumbbells.
   Because of the limit in weight available, cans are best suited for people with
   poor strength or for those performing workouts that have very high reps.
gallon jugs—Plastic gallon jugs weigh about 8 pounds (4 kilograms) when filled
   with fluid or 14 pounds (6 kilograms) when filled with sand. The handles
   allow them to be gripped in a fashion similar to that of dumbbells (although
   they’re more awkward to lift). The weight can be adjusted by altering the
   amount of fluid or sand in the jugs.
Human Body
Your own body weight or that of a training partner can be used as a form of
resistance.
own body weight—Exercises such as push-ups, chin-ups, dips, body-weight
   squats, and crunches use pure body weight, nothing else, to get the job done
   (see figure 4.16).
                              Figure 4.16    Dips.




partner body weight—When training with a partner, you can do a variety of
  exercises that use the partner’s body weight as resistance. For example, rows,
  bench presses, and squats can all be done with the weight of a training partner
  (see figure 4.17).
                           Figure 4.17    Body rows.




body-weight exercise accessories—Certain equipment has been designed for use
  with exercises that primarily rely on one’s body weight:
chin-up bar—A chin-up bar is simply a horizontal bar that is mounted to its own
  stand, wall, ceiling, doorway, or other exercise apparatus (such as a power
  rack or cable crossover).
dip bars—Parallel bars set high enough above the floor to allow dips to be
  performed between them. They can also be used for leg raises for the
  abdominals and for a variety of other exercises. Some dipping bars are angled
  inward at one end so that the distance between the two bars is different. This
  allows you to perform dips with varying grip width.
vertical bench—This device is composed of a long, vertical, padded bench that is
  attached to a metal platform that has handles and armrests. The lifter suspends
  the body by supporting the weight with the forearms and pressing the back
  against the pad. This bench is used for leg raises (see figure 4.18) and is
  sometimes referred to as a captain’s chair. Some vertical benches have dip
  bars extended off the front.
                Figure 4.18    Knee raises on a vertical bench.




back extension bench—A high, short, padded bench that has leg pads set at the
  same height as the bench. This allows the lifter to lie prone with the pelvis
  resting on the padded bench and the feet secured under the leg pads while
  doing back extensions.
suspension trainer—The TRX is responsible for making suspension training
  popular. But long before TRX, chains or ropes with handles were used. Today
  there are numerous other suspension trainer brands that have followed in the
  footsteps of TRX. Suspension training involves straps, often made of canvas or
  nylon that suspend part of the body (usually from the arms or feet) to allow
  the person’s own body to provide resistance. For example, you can do inverted
  rows using a suspension trainer to work the lats (see figure 4.19).
                     Figure 4.19    Inverted rows on a TRX.




Simple Weight Machines
Simple weight machines are those machines and apparatuses that provide a
constant level of resistance throughout the entire range of motion. These devices
include linear guided machines and cable pulley machines. They contain a
weight that must be moved. The lifter directly moves the weight along its guide
rods or through a cable pulley system.

Linear Guided Machines

Linear guided machines consist of an apparatus that rides on two guide rods.
This limits the movement to a linear, or straight, movement. These types of
machines usually require the addition of weight plates for added resistance.
Smith machine—A type of machine that consists of a barbell that rides along
  two vertical rods that serve as guides. The bars permit the barbell to move
  only in a vertical direction, but they have safety catches at several points from
  the bottom of the machine to the top to allow the user to start or stop the
  exercise at any point. This machine is typically used just for exercises that
  require vertical pushing or pulling, such as the squat, bench press, and row
  (see figure 4.20).
             Figure 4.20     Incline bench press on a Smith machine.




leg press—This machine consists of a sled that rides along two rods that are
   angled at approximately 45 degrees. There is a seat for a lifter to sit in while
   placing the feet on the sled (see figure 4.21). After the lifter disengages the
   safety bar, the sled is free to move up and down the linear guide rod.
   However, the natural arc of motion of the legs in that position is curvilinear (a
   combination of a curve and a straight line). This has prompted some
   manufacturers of weight machines to design leg press machines that follow a
   curvilinear path. This more natural motion places less stress on the knees.
                           Figure 4.21     The leg press.




hack squat—This machine for leg exercises is similar to the leg press except that
  the lifter stands rather than sits. A padded sled rides along two guide rods that
  are angled at about 50 to 80 degrees. The lifter stands in the hack squat with
  the back against the padded sled and the shoulders under the shoulder pads.
  After disengaging the safety bars, the lifter squats down and back up, allowing
  the sled to follow.

Cable Pulley Machines

Cable pulley machines refer to exercise machines that are based on a simple
system of cables and pulleys. In their most basic form they consist of a cable that
routes through a pulley (or several pulleys) and connects to a weight stack. A
pulley is a freely rotating wheel used to change the direction of force applied by
a cable. This allows for force to be applied to a muscle in a variety of directions,
such as horizontal. A weight stack is a stack of specialized weight plates (usually
rectangular in shape and weighing 5 to 20 pounds each) that are fixed so that
they can slide vertically on the guide rods of a weight machine. Each weight
plate is drilled with a horizontal hole that allows a pin to be placed through the
plate. This weight and all those above it may then be lifted by the moveable rod,
which is typically attached to a cable or lever arm. When tension is placed on the
cable (that is, the cable is pulled), the weight stack is lifted along its guide rods,
thereby supplying resistance. Some home machines, such as Bowflex, use
flexible rods for resistance instead of a weight stack. Cables offer a number of
benefits to weightlifters. Because the cable can be pulled in a number of
directions, it offers constant tension on the muscle throughout the entire range of
motion (see figure 4.22).
                      Figure 4.22    The cable crossover.




cable attachments—A handle must be attached to the end of the cable in order
  for a cable machine to be used. A variety of cable attachments are used for a
  variety of exercises:
carabiner—This clip mechanism allows for easy attachment of bars to the cable
  (see figure 4.23).
           Figure 4.23    A carabiner that can be attached to a cable.




lat bar—Primarily used when training the latissimus dorsi and other back
   muscles on the pulldown machine. The most common lat bar is a long shaft
   that bends down on both sides (see figure 4.24).
parallel-arm lat bar—This bar has handles on the end that are perpendicular to
   the bar and allow a neutral grip to be maintained during pulldowns and cable
   rows (see figure 4.24).
         Figure 4.24     Lat bar (top) and parallel-arm lat bar (bottom).




EZ bar—The EZ bar attachment is shaped similar to the EZ curl bar: a stretched-
  out W (see figure 4.25). Most have a rotating sleeve that allows the bar to
  swivel to reduce the stress placed on the wrists. This bar is typically used for
  cable biceps curls and triceps pressdowns.
short straight bar—This bar attachment is similar to an Olympic bar in shape
  but is much shorter in length (about 20 inches or 51 centimeters). Most have a
  rotating sleeve. This bar can be used for a variety of exercises, including
  triceps pressdowns, curls, reverse curls, and upright rows (see figure 4.25).
    Figure 4.25     Short straight bar (top) and EZ bar (bottom) attachments.




low row bar—This attachment has two short parallel handles connected to two
  triangle-shaped bars (see figure 4.26). It is used primarily for cable rows and
  close-grip pulldowns.
                           Figure 4.26     Low row bar.




long multiple-use V-bar—This bar looks like an upside-down V, with long
   handles for gripping projecting out to the sides. Because of its design, this bar
   may relieve some of the load on the wrists during heavy triceps pressdowns.
   Rows and pulldowns are other exercises that can be performed with the V-bar.
single-handle D-grip—This handle looks like a stirrup with a swiveling handle
   to grasp (see figure 4.27). It is designed for unilateral cable exercises such as
   lateral raises, rows, curls, and triceps pressdowns.
                      Figure 4.27    Single-handle D-grip.




pressdown bar—This bar looks like an inverted V or U and is used primarily for
  triceps pressdowns.
rope—As the name implies, this attachment is literally a thick rope with a metal
  sleeve where it attaches to the cable (see figure 4.28). This attachment can be
  used for performing various cable exercises such as triceps pressdowns,
  hammer curls, and cable crunches.
                        Figure 4.28    Rope attachment.




ankle collar—A wide ankle bracelet that clips to pulleys to allow leg exercises to
  be performed with cables, such as leg lifts and leg curls (see figure 4.29).
            Figure 4.29    Leg raises with an ankle collar attachment.




                        Variable Resistance
This category of strength training equipment provides variable resistance,
whether controlled or not. It includes machines that purposely vary the resistance
throughout the range of motion and equipment that varies the resistance
throughout the range of motion in an uncontrolled fashion.

Cam-Based Resistance Machines
Cam-based resistance machines are the type of weight machines found in most
gyms. They are often called selectorized machines because of the weight stack
that is on most of these machines. However, some cam-based machines are plate
loaded. The most popular brands are Cybex, Life Fitness, Nautilus, PreCor,
Hoist, and Paramount.

The cam is an ellipse connected to the movement arm of the machine on which
the cable or belt travels. The purpose of the cam is to provide variable resistance,
which changes how heavy the weight feels (but the actual weight never changes)
as the lifter moves through the range of motion of the exercise. The reason the
perception of the weight needs to change is that each joint movement has an
associated strength curve. That is, at different angles of the joint the strength of
the agonist muscle varies. For example, during a biceps curl, the strength of the
agonist muscles (mainly the biceps) progressively gets stronger up to about 90
degrees of bend at the elbow. After that, the strength progressively decreases as
the curl continues. This is known as an ascending and descending strength curve.

There are three types of strength curves and, therefore, three basic cam shapes
that correspond to each strength curve:
ascending and descending curve—This type of strength curve was described
   previously with the biceps curl as an example. In this type of curve the
   strength increases up to about the halfway point of the movement and then
   decreases through the rest of the movement. For this reason it is often referred
   to as bell shaped. The shape of the ascending and descending cam is similar to
   a bell or an inverted U with the largest radius in the middle (see figure 4.30a).
ascending curve—In the ascending curve the strength progressively increases
   through the entire range of motion. An example of this is the bench press. The
   farther the weight moves away from the chest, the stronger the agonist
   muscles are. The shape of the ascending cam is oblong with the largest radius
   at the distal end (see figure 4.30b).
descending curve—In the descending curve the strength progressively decreases
   through the entire range of motion. This type of strength curve can be
   experienced during the row exercise. As the handles are pulled closer to the
   body, the strength of the agonist muscles decreases. The shape of the
   descending cam is oblong with the largest radius at the proximal end (see
   figure 4.30c).
Figure 4.30   Types of cam machines: (a) ascending and descending cam, (b)
                 ascending cam, and (c) descending cam.




Lever-Arm Resistance Machines
Lever-arm resistance machines use counterbalanced lever arms to mimic the
strength curves of the muscles being trained. Therefore, much like cam-based
machines, the counterbalanced lever arms vary the resistance throughout the
range of motion by altering the amount of weight that counterbalances the
weight being moved. These are usually plate-loaded machines; however, some of
them use a weight stack system. The most popular line of lever-arm resistance
machines is Hammer Strength by Life Fitness (see figure 4.31).
                 Figure 4.31     A Hammer Strength chest press.




Resistance With Pull
Some exercise devices don’t rely on mass for resistance but on the energy their
material supplies. Springs, bands, and other material that resist being pulled are
such devices. These devices provide only ascending resistance, because the
resistance progressively increases over the range of motion.

Springs

The force generated by a spring is a restoring force, which attempts to move the
two attachment points back to their original resting positions when they are
either pulled farther apart or pushed closer together. The force a spring supplies
depends on its material and the diameter of its coils. The distance the spring is
pulled or compressed also changes the force, because the farther the ends are
moved away from their original position, the more force they will supply. This is
known as the spring rate—the rate at which tension increases as the ends move.
This characteristic makes it impossible to maintain a particular resistance level
over the movement of the exercise.

As the spring is deflected, resistance goes up; as it is relaxed, resistance goes
down. Because of spring rate, users are forced to select a resistance that will be
within their strength capability at maximum deflection, or they won’t be able to
do the exercise movement at all. As a result, during the first 50 percent or more
of the movement, resistance is often too low to produce much benefit. Spring-
resistance exercise devices come in a variety of setups. These include simple
handheld devices that were popular in the 1950s, such as the Bull Worker, Chest
Expander, and Grip Master (see figure 4.32). Although strength training has
progressed far beyond spring resistance, some spring devices are still being used
in certain products such as hand grippers (see figure 4.33), Pilates exercise
machines, and the Stamina Gyrotonics spring-resistance exercise machine.
Figure 4.32   Bull Worker.
                          Figure 4.33     Hand gripper.




Elastic Bands and Tubing

Elastic bands and tubing supply a restoring force similar to that of springs.
However, the force is applied only when the ends of the material are being
pulled away from one another. Like springs, elastic bands and tubing have a
spring rate. That is, as they are lengthened, the resistance they provide increases
(see figure 4.34). This type of resistance is known as linear variable resistance
and provides numerous benefits that free weights can not. Because the resistance
gets harder as you pull the bands, it is great for targeting the fast-twitch muscle
fibers and developing greater muscle power. Because they are lightweight and
portable, bands and tubing allow exercisers to work out at home or while away
from home. They can also be added to free weights to provide both isotonic
resistance from the free weights and the linear variable resistance from the
bands. Research shows that this method can produce superior gains in muscle
strength and power than using free weights alone. Bands and tubes are color
coded to represent a certain resistance level. See table 4.1 for color and
resistance codes.
Figure 4.34   Elastic bands.
                           Speed Machines
This category of strength training equipment deals with machines that control
the rate of speed of movement. The type of muscle contraction where the speed
remains constant is considered isokinetic. Equipment that controls the speed of
movement provides resistance simply by moving through a range of motion at a
particular set speed while the lifter applies as much force as possible to the lever
arm without altering the speed at which the lever arm moves. Because the lever
arm must be moved at a controlled, constant rate, the machines that provide this
type of resistance—known as isokinetic dynamometers—are controlled by a
computer.
isokinetic dynamometer—This computerized resistance machine can be
   programmed to move at a variety of set speeds. These are commonly found
   only in laboratory settings or sports medicine clinics as a tool for measuring
   the amount of force that an athlete can apply. This type of equipment is
   usually interfaced with a computer to not only control the rate of speed of the
   movement but to measure force applied as well. There are several
   disadvantages of isokinetic dynamometers. The first is the fact that the only
   motion they permit is angular. In other words, they permit only flexion or
   extension at the elbow, wrist, knee, or ankle. They cannot be used for pressing
   exercises, such as the bench press, shoulder press, or squat. The other
   disadvantage of isokinetic dynamometers is that no isokinetic muscle actions
   actually occur in real-life movements.
         Nontraditional and New Apparatus
The last category of strength training equipment covers equipment that is
typically not categorized among the other more common forms of strength
training equipment. These devices include vibration machines, electronic and
computerized resistance machines, pneumatic resistance machines, hydraulic
resistance machines, and the Bodyblade. Common to them all is the fact that the
way they provide resistance is novel.

Vibration Machines
Whole-body vibration machines usually consist of a device that the user can
stand, lie, sit, or place the hands or any other part of the body on to transmit
vibration to the body tissues the user wishes to stimulate (see figure 4.35). Most
of these vibration machines are about the size of a typical stair stepper, and the
vibration platform is about 32 inches by 20 inches (81 by 51 centimeters). The
control panel allows the user to change the speed (or frequency) and the
magnitude of the vibration.
                       Figure 4.35     Vibration machine.




Most machines have vibration plates that move up and down and side to side,
while others work as a high-speed wobble board. The energy from the
mechanical vibration (of the plate) is transferred through the body, causing the
muscle fibers to contract and relax at an extremely rapid rate and with very high
force. Research shows that performing vibration training for several weeks can
increase muscle strength and power (Issurin and Tenenbaum 1999) as well as
increase the release of growth hormone and testosterone, which are anabolic
hormones (Bosco et al. 2000). Although most people cannot understand how
vibration can be considered a method of strength training, it is slowly being
recognized for its ability to increase strength, power, and possibly muscle
growth.

Electronic and Computerized Resistance Machines
Electronic and computerized machines provide resistance through gears and
belts connected to a motor. These are programmed to provide variable resistance
throughout the range of motion to follow the strength curve of the muscle being
trained. Resistance can be increased in increments as small as one pound through
a touch screen, button, or foot pedal. Some machines can be programmed to
provide greater resistance during the eccentric portion of the exercise.

Pneumatic Resistance Machines
Pneumatic resistance machines use a compressor to supply air pressure for
resistance. This allows the lifter to adjust the resistance on his or her own
throughout the range of motion (see figure 4.36). The benefit of this is that as the
muscles fatigue during a set, the resistance can be reduced to allow more reps to
be completed.
                       Figure 4.36    Pneumatic machine.




Both electronic and pneumatic machines work in one plane, so the user’s motion
is predefined. Electronic and pneumatic machines can be less intimidating and
safer for beginning exercisers because weight stacks aren’t visible and plates do
not have to be loaded. Some exercisers do not like electronic or pneumatic
equipment, however, because they don’t provide the feel of lifting an actual
weight stack, dumbbell, or barbell. These modalities also can be more expensive
than other strength training equipment, and they require special wiring for
electricity or a layout to accommodate an air compressor and hoses.

Because of their uniqueness and ability to suit any population, electronic and
pneumatic machines can be an excellent investment and provide variety in
strength training for all exercisers.

Hydraulic Resistance Machines
Hydraulic resistance machines provide resistance through hydraulics. The lever
arm on these machines is connected to a hydraulic piston that provides resistance
against the oil-filled chamber it resides in. The problem with hydraulic resistance
machines is that they allow for concentric contractions only. Therefore, most
hydraulic machines train dual muscles but only through the concentric portion.
For instance, the hydraulic biceps machine is a biceps–triceps machine because
after the user curls the weight up, he or she must press it back down using the
triceps muscles.
Bodyblade
Bodyblade, shown in figure 4.37, is a five-foot-long fiberglass beam that
resembles a snow ski and works by the laws of inertia (an object set in motion
remains in motion until another force acts on it to stop or change its direction).
The user holds the middle of it and pushes and pulls on the apparatus to start it
oscillating. During use, it oscillates at an average rate of about 270 times per
minute. These oscillations in the ends of the blade create a force that the holder
must resist to literally keep it from flying out of the hands. With each oscillation
the muscles of the arms and core must resist the movement by contracting. The
greater the amplitude of the blade ends (the farther they flex up and down), the
more force the user must apply to resist the movement. By varying the positions
of the body or direction of the flexing blade, the user can target specific muscle
groups throughout the body. Since the blade can be used at any angle and
position, a major benefit to this piece of equipment is that it can mimic the
movements in a particular sport and provide the required specificity of training.
The disadvantage of the Bodyblade is the fact that it is limited mainly to upper-
body and core exercises with little application for the lower-body muscles.
                           Figure 4.37    Bodyblade.




                               Summary
Strength training equipment has developed over the decades from simple free
weights to complex machinery that provide resistance through novel
mechanisms. This, however, is not to say that the more modern equipment is
better than the simplest form of free weights. In fact, free weights have many
advantages and very few disadvantages. Modern resistance machines, on the
other hand, tend to have many more disadvantages than free weight equipment.
Because all forms of strength training equipment offer different advantages and
are limited by different disadvantages, it is best to use a variety of training
equipment in your strength training program.
                      Part II
             Training for Muscle Mass




Muscle growth—known scientifically as muscle hypertrophy—involves a
complex integration of multiple factors. Strength training

initiates many of these factors through both the mechanical stress and the
metabolic stress that it places on the muscle fibers.

The mechanical stress is the actual physical weight the muscle fibers must resist
by contracting. This damages muscle fibers

and initiates a biochemical cascade that leads to growth of muscle fibers. The
metabolic stress comes from the energy demands

placed on the muscle to fuel muscle contractions. This type of stress initiates
biochemical cascades that influence growth

of muscle fiber through various mechanisms that mainly result in an increase in
muscle protein synthesis. Although the details

of many of these biochemical cascades are well defined, it is currently unknown
exactly how all these factors work together

to result in muscle growth. Yet, through both trial and error and scientific
investigation, we do know what training techniques

and programs work best to influence the factors that are responsible for causing
muscle growth. These techniques and programs

are presented in part II.

Chapter 5 covers the basics of creating strength training programs for
maximizing muscle growth. This chapter teaches you

how to organize your workouts for the week based on your training experience
and schedule. It presents guidelines for designing

workouts that are effective at producing gains in muscle mass. In addition, it
breaks down training into exercises for each

major muscle group to allow maximal growth of each.

Chapter 6 introduces you to more advanced training strategies that you can add
to the training foundations in chapter 5. These

techniques are designed to exaggerate the mechanical stresses and metabolic
stresses that are placed on the muscle fibers

to encourage muscle growth. These are strategies that are critical to the advanced
lifter because the advanced lifter’s muscle

fibers are better able to handle the stress of strength training.

Chapter 7 concludes this section with long-term training cycles that are designed
for beginning, intermediate, and advanced

lifters. In addition, training cycles are designed for specific overall goals as well
as for emphasizing the growth of specific
muscle groups. Whether you’re a beginner or an advanced weightlifter, if your
current goal is to build more muscle, in part

II you will discover all you need to know to realize that goal.
                 Chapter 5
     Tactics for Building Muscle Mass
Regardless of whether your goal is to maximize muscle mass or strength gains,
knowing how to develop an individualized training program that delivers results
is critical to your pursuit. While advanced training techniques—like those
described in chapter 6—can help you rapidly advance muscle gains, you must
first understand how to organize a basic training program. This chapter
demonstrates how to put together a basic yet highly effective program that you
can build on later with more advanced training methods as you progress.

If your primary goal is to build muscle mass, then you must consider several
things when structuring your strength training program. You will need to
consider the variables discussed in chapter 2. These include the choice of
exercises you will perform, the order of those exercises, how many sets of each
exercise you will do, how heavy a weight you will use on those exercises, how
much rest you will allow between sets, and even how fast or slow your reps are.
You will also need to consider how often you will train each muscle group, how
you will split up your training, and how you will periodize (or cycle) your
training for optimal results.


                            Weekly Splits
Most weightlifters break their training down into a weekly period. While this
isn’t a necessity, it seems to be the simplest approach to split up training days
because our calendar revolves around a weekly schedule. All other activities in
our lives—school, work, television programs, and leisure activities—all follow a
weekly schedule. It’s only logical to break your strength training down into a
similar period. How you split your training will influence how often you train
each muscle group per week. Choosing a training split that is the most
advantageous for you depends on several factors, such as your training
experience, your overall goals, your schedule, and even convenience.

The following seven training splits are the most common and effective for the
majority of bodybuilders. These splits start with the easiest (whole-body
training) split for beginners (those with less than six months of consistent
strength training) and progressively become more intense as they advance
through push–pull training splits and two-day training splits, which are ideal for
intermediate lifters (those with less than one year of consistent strength training)
and end with five-day training splits and twice-a-day training splits, which are
geared for the advanced lifter (those with over a year of consistent strength
training). Choosing the right split will depend primarily on your training
experience, but you should also take into consideration your schedule.

Whole-Body Training
Whole-body training refers to single workouts that stress every major muscle
group. In other words, the entire body is trained in every workout. Because you
will need to train up to 11 major muscle groups (chest, shoulders, back,
quadriceps, hamstrings, biceps, triceps, forearms, trapezius, calves, and
abdominals) in each workout, the number of exercises and sets you can do per
muscle group is minimal. This allows you to train each muscle group more
frequently because it receives a limited amount of stress at each workout.
Typically, most whole-body training workouts use one or two exercises per
muscle group, and total sets per muscle group rarely exceed six. Compare this to
the four-day and five-day training splits, which allow the weightlifter to hit three
to six exercises and a total of 12 to 30 sets per muscle group. The fewer total sets
a muscle group receives, the less recuperation it usually needs before being
trained again.

Whole-body training splits allow you to train each muscle group about three
times per week. This type of training split is best for beginning weightlifters
(those with up to six months of training experience), those who want to train
each muscle group more frequently, and those who are interested in cutting down
on body fat. The reason whole-body training is the best choice for beginners is
that the initial adaptations made in a strength training program involve the
nervous system. That is, in the first few months of strength training, the primary
improvements are seen in the motor units (the nerve fibers that serve the muscle
cells). These improvements allow the muscles to contract more efficiently and
are best trained by repetition. This means that the best way for beginners to train
is with high repetitions and more frequent training to program the nervous
system. They should use the same exercises in each workout to maximize the
learning effect that will have the greatest benefit on the nervous system.

Whole-body training is effective for building muscle mass for two reasons. The
first benefit is known as the staircase effect. Training each muscle group every
other day (or about three days per week) allows you to build onto the effects of
the previous workout. If you wait too long between workouts, you’re back to
square one—almost as if you are starting over from the original point. Some
experts believe that the staircase effect is critical to muscle adaptation. The
second benefit to whole-body training is that it stimulates a large portion of the
body’s muscle mass. This leads to higher production of growth hormone and
testosterone (important for stimulating muscle growth) than workouts that train
fewer muscle groups. If you are an advanced weightlifter, the best way to use
whole-body training is to mix up the exercises at every workout. This allows you
to hit each muscle group from a variety of angles for better stimulation of the
majority of muscle fibers within each muscle group.

When it comes to shedding body fat, no workout split is more conducive to that
goal than whole-body training. Training all the major muscle groups revs up
cellular processes in all the muscle cells, which increases the metabolic rate for
up to 48 hours after the workout is over. This means you will burn more calories
while sitting around doing nothing. See tables 5.1 and 5.2 for beginner and
advanced whole-body training splits.
Upper-and Lower-Body Training
Upper-and lower-body training is a training split that simply breaks the body
down into upper-body (chest, back, shoulders, trapezius, biceps, triceps) and
lower-body (quadriceps, hamstrings, calves, and often abdominals to limit the
volume of work done in upper-body workouts). This allows you to train each
muscle group two or three times per week depending on whether your schedule
allows for four or six days of training each week. The four-day-per-week
schedule is a good advancement for the beginner who is progressing from
whole-body training. The advantage of upper-and lower-body training over
whole-body training is that you can do more volume for each muscle group with
upper-and lower-body training. Because you train fewer muscle groups each
workout, you have the time to do more exercises and total sets for each muscle
group. This means you can train each muscle group more intensely than with
whole-body training. However, this means the muscles will require more rest on
an upper-and lower-body training split. For this reason most bodybuilders using
this split train four days per week, as shown in table 5.3. This allows for two or
three days of rest for each muscle group between workouts and allows for
different exercises to be done for each muscle group on the separate workouts.
Two-Day Training Split
The two-day training split is very similar to the upper-and lower-body training
split. The minor difference is that some upper-body muscle groups are trained
with the legs (see table 5.4). This is because the upper body is composed of more
muscle groups than the lower body. Many weightlifters use a scheme similar to
the upper-and lower-body training split, but they train biceps and triceps with
legs. This splits the two workouts into a workout for the chest, back, shoulder,
trapezius, and abdominals and a workout for the quadriceps, hamstrings, calves,
biceps, and triceps. The benefits of the two-day training split are the same as for
the upper-and lower-body training split. However, the advantage to the two-day
training split is that it better balances the number of muscle groups trained for
each workout. You can use the two-day training split to train each muscle group
either twice a week or three times per week, depending on your schedule and the
amount of time you want to allow muscle groups to recover.
Three-Day Training Split
The three-day training split is a common training split used by many
bodybuilders to break the major muscle groups into three separate workouts.
Although it is not critical how you pair muscle groups, a very common way to
break up muscle groups with a three-day split is to separate workouts into a leg
day (quadriceps, hamstrings, calves), a push day that trains the muscle groups
involved in pushing movements (chest, shoulders, and triceps), and a pull day
that trains muscle groups that perform pulling movements (back and biceps).
Muscle groups such as abs can be trained on the first and third workout (if
training each muscle group once per week) or on the second workout (if training
each muscle group twice per week). Dividing the body into three separate
workouts allows you to further increase the volume that is typically used in
whole-body training, upper-and lower-body training, and two-day training splits.
This type of split allows you to give each muscle group three to seven days of
rest between workouts. Most bodybuilders using this system train each muscle
group either once or twice per week. When training muscle groups just once per
week, the typical three-day training split is done on Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday, as shown in table 5.5. Although the training doesn’t have to take place on
these precise three days, it is best to provide one day of rest between workouts.
However, if your schedule does not allow for this, it is perfectly fine to train two
or even all three of the workouts on consecutive days. This three-day training
split is convenient for bodybuilders who train with high intensity or high volume
because of the amount of rest allowed. For those interested in training each
muscle group twice per week, the three-day training split can be done on
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday and then repeated Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday with a rest day on Sunday. Lower volume should be used for most
muscle groups when training this frequently.
Four-Day Training Split
The four-day training split divides all the major muscle groups of the body into
four separate training days. This allows you to train fewer muscle groups each
workout. By training fewer muscle groups per workout, you can increase the
volume and intensity of your workouts. Both of these factors are important for
continued progress as your training experience grows. Most four-day training
splits are done on a Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday schedule, and rest
days are taken on Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday. A common way to break up
the body’s muscle groups is by training chest, triceps, and abdominals on
Mondays; quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves on Tuesdays; shoulders, trapezius,
and abdominals on Thursdays; and back, biceps, and forearms on Friday, as
covered in table 5.6.
The four-day training split pairs larger muscle groups with smaller ones that
assist the larger muscle groups, such as chest with triceps. The triceps assist the
chest muscles (pectorals) in all pressing exercises such as the bench press. The
logic behind this technique is that the chest workout also works the triceps
muscles. With this in mind, it makes sense to continue with exercises that further
target the triceps. This is the same with pairing back, biceps, and forearms as
well as quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves. Along this line of reasoning, you
could also pair chest with shoulders and trapezius because the shoulder (deltoid)
muscles assist the chest during all exercises that target the chest. The most
important rule here is that larger muscle groups are trained before the smaller
muscle groups that assist them, because if you train the smaller muscle groups
first, they will be fatigued when you are training the larger muscle group and
will limit strength on the exercises for the larger muscle group.

Of course, this isn’t your only option for pairing muscle groups. On the flip side
of pairing muscle groups that work together is the concept of separating muscle
groups that work together. The reasoning for this is that the smaller muscle
group is often fatigued after training the larger muscle group. This will limit the
strength of the smaller muscle group and cause it to fatigue earlier when doing
exercises that target it. This in turn can limit growth of that muscle. The option
here would be to split up the muscle groups into those that perform opposite
actions. For example, on Monday train chest and back; Tuesday train shoulders,
trapezius, and abdominals; Thursday train quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves;
and Friday train biceps, triceps, forearms, and abdominals, as shown in table 5.7.
The Monday and Friday workouts best exemplify this training strategy. Training
chest and back allows you to train two muscle groups that don’t fatigue each
other. The same can be said for training biceps and triceps together. Each muscle
group performs an opposite motion of its training pair. The biceps flex the elbow
while the triceps extend it. Not only does this help to prevent fatigue of the
second muscle group trained, but it can also enhance muscle strength, as
explained in chapter 9, with the technique known as front-to-back training.
Five-Day Training Split
The five-day split lets you train most muscle groups solo. This means that each
workout you can focus on one major muscle group. Training this way lets you
radically increase the intensity factor of training and the total volume you
perform. This is because each major muscle group is trained when it is rested
and at its strongest. A sample five-day training program might be chest on
Monday, legs (quadriceps, hamstrings, and calves) on Tuesday, back on
Wednesday, shoulders and trapezius on Thursday, and arms (triceps, biceps, and
forearms) on Friday. Abdominals can be thrown in on any day such as Monday
and Thursday, as shown in table 5.8. This lets you have the weekends off for
rest. When you take the rest days is not critical because you could essentially
take any two days off during the week. Rest days with this split are more a
matter of your schedule. If training on the weekends is not a problem, then train
Saturday and Sunday, but take two weekdays off for rest.
Twice-a-Day Training Split
This is a demanding split that offers several advantages for only the most
advanced bodybuilders. As the name implies, the twice-a-day training split
involves training at two separate times a day. Typically, most bodybuilders who
train twice a day train one muscle group earlier in the day and one muscle group
later in the day (see table 5.9). The break between the two training sessions
usually is at least six hours. Depending on your goal, this allows you to either
train more frequently or get more complete rest days. With twice-a-day training
you can train all the major muscle groups of the body in three or four days. This
means you can get either three or four days of rest each week if you train the
muscle groups once per week. However, this method also allows you to train
each muscle group up to twice per week. Another way to use twice-a-day
training is to follow a typical five-day training split that incorporates a not-so-
typical twist: train the same muscle group twice per day. According to research,
this may be a beneficial way to train muscles. See chapter 6 for more details on
this training method.
                       Body-Part Training
Regardless of what type of split you choose, you need to be informed about the
best ways to train each muscle group according to your training split of choice.
The training split you use will influence factors such as the number of exercises
you perform and the total number of sets you do per muscle group. But generally
speaking, your training split does not have to influence the type of exercises you
choose, the amount of weight used, the number of reps performed, or the amount
of rest you allow between sets. Therefore, there are general rules to consider
when designing a strength training program, regardless of the spilt you are
employing.

If your goal is to maximize muscle mass, then your most important rule has to
deal with taking all sets to muscle failure. Although the sweet spot for muscle
growth is said to be in the range of 8 to 12 reps, newer research from McMaster
University in Canada suggests that the amount of weight and rep range used may
not matter as much as once proposed as long as sets are taken to muscle failure.
One of their studies reported that participants training for 10 weeks using
weights that allowed them to complete 20 to 30 reps and taking each set to
muscle failure gained as much muscle mass as those training with weights that
limited them to 8 to 12 reps per set and taking each set to muscle failure (Burd et
al. 2010). Other studies done by this group demonstrate that the higher rep
ranges (20-30) with light weight taken to muscle failure increase muscle protein
synthesis to an equivalent amount or even better than lower rep ranges (4-5 reps)
taken to muscle failure (Burd et al. 2011). So the smartest plan of attack is to
cycle through a variety of rep ranges from very low (3-5 per set) with heavy
weight to very high (20-30+ per set) with light weight, and a multitude of rep
ranges in between, such as 6 to 8 per set, 9 to 11 per set, and 12 to 15 per set.
This way you get the benefit that each rep range imparts, aside from the direct
influence on muscle protein synthesis. For example, heavier-weight workouts
have been shown to increase testosterone levels higher than workouts with
lighter weight. Testosterone is an anabolic hormone that initiates the process of
muscle growth. However, higher reps, such as 15 or more, are associated with a
higher rate of release of growth hormone compared to workouts involving
heavier weight. Because growth hormone is involved in muscle growth,
maximizing its release after a workout can be critical. Higher reps also enhance
the capillarization of muscle fibers. That is, the amount of blood vessels that
supply the muscles increases with higher-repetition training. By increasing the
number of blood vessels that supply a muscle fiber, there is an accompanying
increase in the delivery of blood to the muscle fibers. Enhancing blood flow to
the muscle fibers increases the supply of critical nutrients for energy and growth
such as carbohydrate, amino acids from protein, and fat. There also is greater
provision of oxygen. Oxygen not only is essential for muscle energy for recovery
between sets but is also critical for lessening the indirect muscle damage that
follows a weightlifting workout. Another benefit of increased blood flow to
muscle fibers is the greater supply of anabolic hormones, such as testosterone
and growth hormone, to the muscles.

The order in which you cycle the rep ranges may not be critical. Periodized
models using linear schemes, reverse linear schemes, and undulating schemes
have all been effective in producing muscle growth. So a variety of periodized
programs that cycle a variety of rep ranges but take each working set to failure
appear to be the best tactic for focusing on muscle growth.

Another important consideration for building muscle mass is the rest time
allowed between sets. Most bodybuilders use shorter rest periods of around one
to two minutes. Shorter rest periods—those that are two minutes or less—have
also been shown to increase the surge of growth hormone that follows a
weightlifting workout. Shorter rest periods also increase the capillarization of the
muscles as well as enhance the activity of enzymes that are involved in energy
supply to the muscle. One study reported that participants following an eight-
week strength-training program who decreased the rest period between sets by
15 seconds every week had greater gains in muscle mass than those keeping rest
periods steady at 2 minutes (Souza-Junior et al. 2011). See chapter 6 for
programs that decrease rest period between sets over time.

Exercise selection and order of those exercises are other important things to
consider for building muscle mass. For larger muscle groups that employ several
multijoint exercises, such as the chest, back, shoulders, and legs, you should
primarily do those multijoint exercises early in the workout when the muscle is
strongest. Then follow those exercises with isolation exercises that involve
movement at one single joint and best isolate the targeted muscle group. The
reason for this is that multijoint exercises recruit the help of other muscle groups
to perform the exercise. The targeted muscle group of that exercise is considered
the primary mover, while the muscle groups that help the primary mover
perform the exercise are considered assistance muscles. An example of this is
the bench press, a multijoint exercise for the chest. In the bench press, the chest
is considered the primary mover while the shoulders, triceps, and even the lats
are considered the assistance muscles. Because multijoint exercises involve
synergy of several muscle groups, you can lift more weight with multijoint
exercises. It is a good idea to do the exercises that you can lift the most weight
with first. This is when all the muscles used in that exercise are freshest and
therefore can all help to lift the greatest amount of weight they are capable of
lifting. Using more weight places more overload on the target muscles, which
can lead to increased muscle hypertrophy over time. All that said, on occasion
it’s a good idea to flip this rule on its head and use the training technique known
as preexhaust. With this technique you do the single-joint exercises for a muscle
group first in the workout and the multijoint exercises last. For more on
preexhaust and why it works and to see a program that uses it, go to chapter 6.



                          Changing Your Split
    No matter the training split that currently is your best fit, you should
    consider changing your split to offer your body some variety in the way
    you train it. Just as it is important to change your weight and reps or rest
    time between sets, altering how you split up your training is another way
    to maintain continual progress in training adaptations and avoid
    stagnation. For beginners, starting on a whole-body training split and
    then slowly progressing to splits that allow more volume to be done for
    each muscle group is a necessity. See the table for a suggested succession
    of training splits based on training experience. Start with the split that
    corresponds to your level of training experience and progress to the next
    split as you reach a new level of training experience.
For gains in strength, the general consensus among experts is that fewer sets tend
to be best. But there is some debate over the ideal volume—or total sets—to use
for optimizing gains in muscle mass. One reason may be that there is no ideal
number of sets for increasing muscle mass. In general, beginners should start out
with fewer sets and gradually increase them as their training experience
progresses. But when you consider experienced bodybuilders, there are few
generalizations that can be made in regard to volume. Some bodybuilders train
with very low volume (6 to 10 total sets per muscle group), while others use
extremely high volume (20 to 30 total sets per muscle group), as did the most
famous bodybuilder of all time, Arnold Schwarzenegger. One bit of advice for
advanced lifters is to cycle training volume from periods of low volume to high
volume. This will depend on the training intensity as well as the training
frequency.

Just remember that these are general guidelines for building a solid foundation
for your training program. Many of the methods you will read about in chapter 6
contradict these guidelines. The reason is that the techniques presented in
chapter 6 are techniques for those with moderate to extensive training
experience. For experienced lifters, changing the convention from time to time
better enables muscle growth because of the radical change in the training
program.

Chest
The chest refers to the muscle group known as the pectoralis major. This consists
of the upper pectoralis major and lower pectoralis major (see figure 5.1). The
pectoralis muscles perform movements such as horizontal adduction of the upper
arms, as in the dumbbell fly. For detailed descriptions of chest exercises, refer to
chapter 14. Basic, multijoint exercises for the chest involve pressing movements,
such as the bench press, incline dumbbell press, and push-up. Isolation exercises
for the chest are flylike exercises that involve movement of the arms without any
change occurring at the elbow joint. Examples of isolation exercises for the chest
include the dumbbell fly, cable crossover, and pec deck. The upper and lower
sections of the chest are hit differently by the various chest exercises. Therefore,
the first order of importance when it comes to chest training is to ensure that you
include exercises that target the upper, middle, and lower pectoralis. Refer to
table 5.10 for basic guidelines in designing a chest workout based on the current
training split used.
Figure 5.1 Pectoralis muscle: (a) the upper pectoralis is targeted by the incline
bench press; (b) the middle pectoralis is targeted by the flat bench press; and (c)
          the lower pectoralis is targeted by the decline bench press.
Shoulders
The shoulders refer to the deltoid muscles found on top of the upper arm. The
deltoid is composed of three heads that originate on different points of the
shoulder girdle but all converge on one common tendon that inserts on the
humerus (upper arm bone). The three heads are the anterior deltoid (front head),
the middle deltoid, and the posterior deltoid (rear head). Although these three
heads work together to lift the upper arm at the shoulder joint, such as during the
lateral raise, each head is stressed differently by different exercises (see figure
5.2). That is why it is important to structure shoulder workouts around basic
multijoint movements (such as the shoulder press) that hit all three heads as well
as isolation exercises (such as front raise for the anterior head, lateral raise or
upright row for the middle head, and rear deltoid raise for the posterior head).
Refer to chapter 15 for detailed descriptions of all shoulder exercises. See table
5.11 for guidelines for designing a shoulder workout based on the current
training split being used.
Figure 5.2 Deltoid muscle: (a) the anterior head is targeted by the front raise;
(b) the middle head is targeted by the lateral raise; and (c) the posterior head is
                    targeted by the bent-over lateral raise.
Back
Back refers to the muscles that make up the backside of the torso. Although the
term back refers mostly to the large latissimus dorsi muscles, or lats, that run
from the upper arms all the way down to the buttocks (see figure 5.3), it can also
include the teres major, the rhomboids, and even the middle and lower portions
of the trapezius, because these muscles are often involved in performing
exercises that are considered back exercises. The two major types of lat
exercises are the pulling exercises (which include pull-ups and pulldowns) and
rowing exercises (which include bent-over barbell rows, T-bar rows, and seated
cable rows). Pull-up and pulldown exercises tend to concentrate more on the
upper and outer lats as well as the teres major. Rowing exercises tend to
concentrate more on the middle and lower lats as well as the rhomboids and
middle trapezius muscles. Other types of lat exercises are the pullover and
straight-arm pulldown. For detailed descriptions of all back exercises, refer to
chapter 16. See table 5.12 for basic guidelines for designing a back workout
based on the current training split used.

The term back also refers to the musculature of the low back. The muscles in the
lower back are those that support the spinal column and allow it to extend back,
such as when you recline in a chair. These are deeper muscle fibers such as the
spinal erectors, which include the longissimus thoracis, iliocostalis lumborum,
and spinalis thoracis. Exercises that train the low back are back extension
exercises and good mornings.
Figure 5.3 Back musculature: (a) the upper and outer lats are worked by the
lat pulldown, and (b) the lower and middle lats are worked by the barbell row.
Trapezius
The trapezius is the large diamond-shaped muscle on the upper back, often
referred to as traps. This muscle has upper, middle, and lower portions that all
perform different movements (see figure 5.4). The upper trapezius primarily lifts
and rotates the shoulder blades upward as when shrugging the shoulders (such as
during dumbbell shrugs). The middle trapezius primarily pulls the shoulder
blades together (such as during face pulls). The lower trapezius rotates the
shoulder blades downward (such as when lifting a barbell overhead with straight
arms like during the snatch). Trapezius training can be paired with shoulders or
back. Most bodybuilders train the traps after shoulders because their primary
interest is in developing the upper portion of the traps. The upper traps are
involved in most deltoid exercises. Therefore, they are sufficiently warmed up
after training shoulders. However, because it is technically a back muscle and
assists during many back exercises, upper traps are often trained with back. Most
lifters typically pick one or two exercises for trap workouts and perform three to
eight sets. If both a barbell and a dumbbell trap exercise are done in the same
workout, the barbell exercise is typically done first. For detailed descriptions of
trapezius exercises, see chapter 17.
Figure 5.4 Trapezius muscle: (a) the upper traps are worked by the barbell
shrug; (b) the middle traps are worked by the facepull; and (c) the lower traps
                     are worked by the prone front raise.
Triceps
The triceps consist of three muscle heads that are on the back of the upper arm.
The three heads of the triceps are the lateral head, long head, and medial head
(see figure 5.5). Each head has a distinct attachment on the upper end, but they
all meet at one common tendon that crosses the elbow and attaches on the ulna.
Contracting the triceps results in extension at the elbow such as the motion the
arm makes when hammering.

The two types of triceps exercises are compound movements and isolation
movements. Compound triceps exercises involve extension at the elbow and
movement at the shoulder. These include close-grip bench presses and dips.
Isolation triceps exercises involve just extension at the elbow with no other joint
movement, such as dumbbell kickbacks. When choosing triceps exercises, you
should include some compound exercises, which are beneficial for adding on
overall triceps mass, as well as a good variety of isolation exercises. The
isolation exercises you choose should hit the three different triceps heads. While
you may not be able to do this in every workout, depending on your split, you
should try to rotate your exercise selection from workout to workout to hit the
different heads.

Although every triceps exercise hits all three heads to some degree, certain ones
are better than others at stressing the different heads because of the
biomechanics involved. Because the long head of the triceps attaches to the
scapula (shoulder blade), it is more strongly contracted during exercises where
the arms are brought overhead or in front of the body. This is because that action
stretches the long head. Muscles contract the strongest when they are stretched
to their longest length. Therefore, exercises that are done overhead such as
overhead extensions (with dumbbells, barbells, or cables) best stress the long
head of the triceps. Exercises that place the arms in front of the body, such as
lying triceps extensions (with barbells, dumbbells, or cables) also hit the long
head to some degree. Extensions that are done with the arms at the sides of the
torso while holding a neutral or overhand grip—such as triceps pressdowns and
dumbbell kickbacks—best target the lateral triceps head. The same exercises
done with an underhand grip seem to stress the medial head. For detailed
descriptions of all triceps exercises, go to chapter 18. Refer to table 5.13 for
basic guidelines for designing a triceps workout based on the current training
split used.
  Figure 5.5 Triceps: (a) the long head is targeted by the overhead triceps
extension; (b) the lateral head is targeted by the dumbbell kickback; and (c) the
         medial head is targeted by the reverse-grip cable pressdown.
Biceps
Biceps refers to two muscle heads that run down the front of the upper arm that
are called the biceps brachii (see figure 5.6). The two heads are the long head (or
outer head) and the short head (or inner head). The major difference between
them is where each muscle attaches on the scapula (shoulder blade). The tendon
of the long head attaches farther back on the scapula than the short head. This is
why they are referred to as long head and short head. Both biceps heads
converge into one tendon near the elbow, and this attaches to the radius to cause
flexion of the elbow when the muscles contract, such as when curling a
dumbbell.

To flex the elbow, the biceps brachii receives help from the assistance muscle
called the brachialis. This muscle lies underneath the biceps muscles and starts at
the humerus (upper arm bone) and attaches to the ulna. The bulk of this muscle
is lower than the bulk of the biceps muscle, which allows it to offer the most
help during the first 30 degrees of elbow flexion. The brachialis is also strongly
involved in elbow flexion when the hands maintain an overhand grip on the bar.
The brachioradialis, although considered a forearm muscle, also helps at the
initiation of elbow flexion. It is strongly involved in elbow flexion when the
hand is in a neutral position, such as during hammer curls.
With the exception of underhand chin-ups, there are no compound exercises for
biceps. Even the underhand chin-up is considered a back exercise. Therefore,
almost all true biceps exercises are single-joint or isolation exercises. However,
the exercises you choose should stress the different biceps heads as well as the
brachialis, which helps to make the biceps appear larger (particularly the lower
portion) when it is properly developed. For detailed descriptions of all biceps
exercises, refer to chapter 19. For basic guidelines for designing biceps workouts
based on the current training split used, see table 5.14. Most exercise choices for
the biceps workout should be underhand (supinated) grip curls, such as barbell
curls, dumbbell curls, and preacher curls. With barbell curls you should
frequently change your grip to stress the heads differently. Doing curls with a
closer grip (hip width or closer) puts more stress on the long head of the biceps
—the part of the biceps that is responsible for the peak that is seen when a
bodybuilder flexes the biceps. Also consider alternating between using a straight
barbell and an EZ curl bar. The EZ curl bar places the hands halfway between an
underhand and a neutral grip. This places greater emphasis on the long head of
the biceps. Therefore, doing hammer curls (using a neutral grip) with dumbbells
or a rope attachment emphasizes the long head of the biceps in addition to the
brachialis and brachioradialis (forearm muscle on the thumb side of the forearm)
muscles. Another exercise that hits the brachialis and brachioradialis and, to a
lesser extent, the biceps is reverse-grip curls with a pronated grip. One other way
to place greater emphasis on the long head is by doing dumbbell curls while
sitting back on an incline between 30 and 60 degrees. This position stretches the
long head of the biceps to put it in its strongest position for contraction.
  Figure 5.6 Biceps: (a) the long head is targeted by the EZ bar curl; (b) the
short head is targeted by the preacher curl; and (c) the brachialis, located beneath
                     the biceps, is targeted by the reverse curl.
To emphasize the short head, you can do the opposite of the incline curl and do
curls on a preacher bench. This places the arms in front of the body, which
shortens the long head and reduces its contraction strength. Other ways to stress
the short head are to do curls with a wider grip (shoulder width and wider) or to
perform supination during dumbbell curls. Supination requires the movement of
the hand from a neutral position to an underhand position while curling. The
order in which you stagger your biceps exercises is not as critical as involving a
variety of movements that emphasize both biceps heads as well as the brachialis.

Since the brachioradialis and other forearm muscles are involved in assisting
most biceps exercises, it is wise to train the forearms after the biceps. Doing
hammer curls and reverse-grip curls at the end of your biceps workout is a smart
way to segue from a biceps workout into a forearm workout. These exercises
involve the brachialis and biceps as well as the brachioradialis muscle.
Forearms
The forearms are the muscles that make up the entire lower arm. Though you do
not need to familiarize yourself with all the different forearm muscles shown in
figure 5.7, you should recognize the difference in those referred to as the wrist
flexor group and those referred to as the wrist extensor group. The wrist flexor
group is composed of forearm muscles that perform wrist flexion—the
movement of the palms toward the inner forearm, such as during a wrist curl.
The wrist extensors, on the other hand, are involved in performing wrist
extension—moving the back of the hand toward the back of the forearm, such as
when you twist the throttle on a motorcycle.

It is wise to train the forearms after the biceps because they are used so strongly
during all biceps exercises. Typically, choosing one wrist curl (flexion) exercise
and one reverse wrist curl (extension) exercise is sufficient for working the
forearm muscles after biceps, especially if reverse-grip or hammer-grip curls
were performed. If grip strength is a limiting factor on back and biceps
exercises, including a specific grip exercise may be warranted. The grip exercise
should be done before the wrist curl and reverse wrist curl exercises. For a
complete listing and detailed descriptions of all forearm exercises, see chapter
20. If training with a whole-body, upper-and lower-body, or two-day split, you
may consider skipping specific forearm work and relying on the fact that the
forearm muscles are used during back and biceps exercises. For basic guidelines
for designing forearm workouts based on the current training split used, see table
5.15.
Figure 5.7 Forearm muscles: (a) the flexor muscles are worked by the wrist
   curl, and (b) the extensor muscles are worked by the reverse wrist curl.
Quadriceps
The quadriceps are the four muscles that make up the front of the thigh. The
vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, and rectus femoris all
originate from different attachment points on the thigh and hip bone, but they all
converge on one common tendon to perform knee extension, such as when you
kick a ball (see figure 5.8). Because the rectus femoris originates on the hipbone,
not the femur (thigh bone) as with the other three quadriceps muscles, it also is
involved in hip flexion, such as when you lift your knee up. Although all four
muscles work together to straighten the knee, certain exercises are better for
targeting specific parts of the quad. For instance, the leg extension best targets
the rectus femoris muscle. However, doing leg extensions with the toes turned in
places more stress on the outer quad (vastus lateralis), and doing leg extensions
with the toes pointed out better targets the inner quads (vastus medialis). The leg
press hits all four quad muscles, but research shows that the emphasis is on the
medialis muscle. Conversely, the hack squat tends to place more emphasis on the
outer quads (vastus lateralis). Squats and lunges, however, hit the four
quadriceps muscles fairly evenly, along with the leg adductors, hamstrings,
gluteus maximus, and other muscles. For detailed descriptions of all quadriceps
exercises, see chapter 21.

For maximizing leg size, you should start your quadriceps workout with one or
two squat exercises (with barbells, Smith machine, or dumbbells) or leg press
exercises, depending on the type of split you are training with. These exercises
are compound exercises that involve extension at the knees and hips. Therefore,
they use not only the quadriceps muscles but also the hamstring and gluteus
maximus muscles (powerful hip extensors). Because these large muscle groups
work together to perform the exercise, they provide great strength. This is the
reason that these exercises should be at the beginning of your leg workout. You
should train these muscles when they are at their strongest so that the greatest
amount of weight can be used for stimulating the most muscle growth.

With the squat and leg press exercises you should routinely alter your foot
position to slightly change the specific muscle fibers that are used during the
exercise. Although squats hit all four quadriceps muscles pretty equally, slightly
greater emphasis can be directed to certain muscles by changing the distance the
feet are spaced apart. It is generally agreed that squats done with the feet close
together place slightly more emphasis on the outer quads than squats done with
the feet shoulder-width apart. Conversely, when squats are done with the feet
spaced much wider than shoulder width, greater emphasis is placed on the inner
quad and adductor muscles. However, one study suggested that little difference
in the use of the medialis or lateralis was observed with a wide or narrow stance
(Paoli, A., et al. 2009). Squats done on a Smith machine or on a squat machine
allow you to change not only the width of your feet but also the distance they are
out in front of your hips. For these exercises the same rules apply in regard to
how wide the feet are spaced apart. It also is possible to reduce the emphasis on
the quadriceps and increase the emphasis on the hamstrings and gluteus
maximus by moving the feet farther forward from the hips. The farther the feet
are placed in front of the hips, the greater the stress placed on the hamstrings and
gluteus maximus and the less stress the quadriceps receive.

The leg press, on the other hand, reduces the amount of stress placed on the
hamstrings and gluteus maximus and maximizes the stress placed on the
quadriceps; the majority of stress hits the vastus medialis muscle. This is due to
the seated position of the angled leg press. The seated position keeps the hips
flexed at about 90 degrees when the legs are fully extended. Since the
hamstrings and gluteus maximus are involved in extension of the hips during
compound leg movements, their involvement is minimized on the leg press.

It’s optimal to include some form of lunging or stepping exercises to train the
legs unilaterally. Because these exercises are compound movements done one
leg at a time, they require a lot of stabilization from small and large muscle
groups. That means they use most of the leg muscles including the quads,
hamstrings, glutes, and adductor and abductor muscles. Not only do these types
of exercises help develop overall size of the thigh muscles, but they also build
functional strength, which transfers to more strength on other exercises, such as
squats.

The only type of isolation exercise for quadriceps is leg extension exercises,
where the only movement that occurs is extension at the knee. This focuses a
good deal of the stress on the rectus femoris muscle, although you can encourage
more involvement from the vastus lateralis or vastus medialis by altering the
position of the feet, as described previously. You should perform leg extension
exercises at the end of the quadriceps workout after you perform the more
demanding compound exercises. However, some bodybuilders prefer to warm up
their quads before heavy compound exercises by doing several light sets of leg
extensions. For basic guidelines for designing quadriceps workouts based on the
current training split used, see table 5.16.
 Figure 5.8 Quadriceps muscle: (a) the vastus medialis is worked by the leg
    press; (b) the vastus lateralis is worked by the hack squat; (c) the vastus
intermedius, located underneath the rectus femoris, is worked by the squat; and
              (d) the rectus femoris is worked by the leg extension.
Hamstrings and Gluteus Maximus
The hamstrings are the muscles on the back of the thigh. The gluteus maximus,
also referred to as the glutes , are the large buttock muscles. The glutes are
involved in extending the legs back (as when standing up from a seated position)
and kicking the legs back behind the body. The hamstrings are composed of the
biceps femoris, the semitendinosus, and the semimembranosus. Collectively the
hamstring muscles not only flex the knee, as when you bend your knee, but they
also work in conjunction with the glutes to extend the legs at the hips (see figure
5.9).

Although compound quadriceps exercises like the squat, hack squat, lunge, and
step-up are traditionally considered quadriceps exercises, they also largely
involve the glutes and the hamstring muscles. For this reason, most bodybuilders
perform fewer hamstring exercises than quadriceps exercises.

Even though the hamstrings involve three different muscles that work together to
perform leg flexion and hip extension, specific exercises better target each
muscle. The Romanian deadlift hits the entire hamstring fairly evenly along with
the glutes because of the hip extension involved in this exercise. The biceps
femoris is better targeted with lying and standing leg curls. The semitendinosus
and semimembranosus, on the other hand, are better targeted with seated leg
curls. Therefore, a thorough hamstring workout should include one exercise that
involves hip extension (such as the Romanian deadlift) and knee flexion (such as
the leg curl). For a complete listing and detailed descriptions of all hamstring
exercises, see chapter 22. If following a whole-body training split, you may
forfeit specific hamstring exercises since the compound quadriceps exercises
also use the hamstrings and glutes very strongly. For basic guidelines for
designing hamstring and glute workouts based on the current training split used,
see table 5.17.
Figure 5.9 Hamstrings and gluteus muscles: (a) the biceps femoris is targeted
by the lying leg curl; (b) the semitendinosus and semimembranosus are targeted
 by the seated leg curl; and (c) the glutes are targeted by the Romanian deadlift.
Calves
Calves refer to two separate muscles on the lower leg. These muscles are the
gastrocnemius (a muscle shaped like an upside-down heart) and the soleus (a
muscle that lies underneath the gastrocnemius), as shown in figure 5.10. Both
muscles perform extension at the ankle, such as when you stand up on your toes.

Certain exercises are better than others at targeting the two calf muscles. For
detailed descriptions of all calf exercises, refer to chapter 23. Standing calf
raises, or any calf raise that involves a fairly straight knee, is better at focusing
the stress to the gastrocnemius. The soleus, on the other hand, is better targeted
with seated calf raises or any calf raise that is performed with the knee bent to
about 90 degrees.

The best way to train calves is to include one or two exercises that target the
gastrocnemius muscle and one exercise that targets the soleus muscle. Most
bodybuilders train their calves after thighs. Some also include a second or third
workout of the calves if they do not train legs twice a week. The reason for this
is that the calves, particularly the soleus, are made up of a slightly higher
percentage of slow-twitch muscle fibers. These muscle fibers have a high-
endurance capacity and recover more quickly than fast-twitch muscle fibers.
This is also the reason that many bodybuilders train their calves with very high
reps (20 to 30 reps per set). However, the best way to train calves is with the use
of a periodized program that cycles the number of reps performed. For basic
guidelines for designing calf workouts based on the current training split used,
see table 5.18.
Figure 5.10 Calf muscles: (a) the gastrocnemius is targeted by the standing
       calf raise, and (b) the soleus is targeted by the seated calf raise.
Abdominals
Abdominals refer to four muscles that are on the midsection, informally called
abs by most bodybuilders. These include the rectus abdominis, the external
obliques, the internal obliques, and the transverse abdominis (see figure 5.11).
The best abdominal program uses exercises that target all four areas of the
abdominal region—upper abs, lower abs, internal and external obliques, and the
transverse abdominis.

The upper abs are best targeted with crunch exercises that involve flexing the
upper spine forward by bringing the shoulders toward the hips, such as the
standard crunch. The lower abdominals are best trained with exercises that
involve flexing the lower spine forward by bringing the knees toward the chest,
such as hanging knee raises. Both the internal and external obliques are best
targeted by exercises that flex the spine laterally to the left and right, such as
oblique crunches. They also are targeted with exercises that involve flexing the
spine forward and rotating it to the left or right, such as with crossover crunches.
The deep transverse abdominis is best trained with core exercises that force the
flexing of the transverse abdominis (pulling the navel in toward the spine) to
stabilize the spine and pelvis. For a complete listing and detailed descriptions of
all abdominal exercises, see chapter 24.
Most bodybuilders train the abdominals more frequently and with higher reps
than they use with most other major muscle groups. This is because the
abdominals are postural muscles that stay flexed for long periods to support the
spine. Therefore, they tend to be slightly higher in slow-twitch muscle fibers
than the other muscle groups. Most bodybuilders train the abdominals a
minimum of three times per week and some train them every day. For most
people, training abdominals on two or three nonconsecutive days per week will
suffice. Because the abdominals are often trained with no more resistance than
the person’s body weight, they are frequently trained with reps in the range of 15
to 30. However, even abdominal training should be periodized to cycle the rep
range and resistance used. Although many people fear that using heavy
resistance on ab exercises will make the waist too big and blocky, it is essential
to train the abdominal muscles like any other muscle group. Increasing the
development of the abdominal muscles improves definition, when body fat is
low. It also helps to increase core strength, which can cross over to help increase
overall strength.

The best way to train the abdominals is by choosing four exercises that each
target a different area of the abdominals for each workout. However, if you train
with a whole-body, upper-and lower-body, or two-day training split, you won’t
have the time to do four separate abdominal exercises. In this case, you should
choose one or two exercises that target one area of the abdominals and rotate the
abdominal region trained for every workout. For basic guidelines for designing
abdominal workouts based on the current training split used, see table 5.19.
 Figure 5.11 Abdominal muscles: (a) the rectus abdominis is worked by the
crunch; (b) the external and internal obliques are worked by the oblique crunch;
and (c) the transverse abdominis, located deep beneath the rectus abdominis and
                      the obliques, is worked by the plank.
              Chapter 6
  Programs for Building Muscle Mass
Building muscle mass takes considerable time and consistency in the gym. But
one problem that arises from consistency is that the muscles quickly adapt to a
workout when it is used for too long. To prevent muscle adaptation from turning
into stagnation, you need to frequently expose your muscles to different training
techniques. Having numerous techniques to draw from allows you to continually
provide new training stimuli to your muscles for optimal growth. This chapter
presents training methods that are effective for maximizing muscle mass.

The techniques are categorized by the type of acute variable of training that is
being manipulated in each workout. Each technique is rated on a scale of 1 to 5
for four critical areas:

 1. Time—the amount of time that a specific workout typically takes to
    complete. This helps you immediately determine whether this training
    technique will fit your training schedule. The higher the number, the longer
    the workouts for that specific technique will take to complete.
 2. Length—the amount of time required for following the program
    consistently before appreciable results are noticeable. This helps you
    determine whether you have the patience required in order for a certain
    program to demonstrate results. The higher the number, the longer you must
    follow this technique in order to realize results.
 3. Difficulty—the amount of weightlifting experience required for using the
    program effectively. This helps you decide whether you have enough
    training experience to take on specific training techniques. The higher the
    number, the more training experience you should have before attempting
    that particular technique.
 4. Results—how effective the program seems to be for mass gains in most
    people. This helps you estimate how much muscle mass you can expect to
    gain with each program. The higher the number, the greater gains in muscle
    mass you can expect from a particular program.

Each training technique provides a sample workout to give you an indication of
how the particular technique can be used. Some provide details on exercise
selection, rep ranges, total sets, and training frequency that you need to follow
closely. However, others offer just a snapshot for one particular workout or one
workout cycle. These are just templates, and you are encouraged to substitute
your own exercises where warranted to maintain variety.

Although you need not use every method listed in this chapter, if you have more
than a year of training experience, you should eventually try a majority of the
methods to determine those that work best for you. Then you can cycle these
techniques, along with the basic programs covered in chapter 5, to create a
periodized program that delivers the desired results and prevents the muscles
from stagnating. Chapter 7 covers periodized schedules for building muscle
mass using the programs and techniques covered in chapters 5 and 6. In the
programs, weights are given in pounds; please see appendix for metric
conversions.


            Programs That Manipulate Sets
The following training techniques alter the sets performed during a workout.
This can be done by increasing the number of exercises performed that make up
one set, by limiting the number of sets performed per muscle group, or by
increasing the number of sets performed for an exercise in a given time. They all
are effective ways to increase your training intensity.

                            Superset Training
Superset training is a method that pairs exercises for agonist and antagonist
muscle groups, such as biceps and triceps, and involves performing a set for
each muscle group back to back with no scheduled rest between exercises. See
table 6.1 for sample exercise pairs that work well for supersets. Superset
workouts typically consist of two or three exercise pairs for each muscle group.
See table 6.2 for a sample triceps and biceps superset workout. Superset training
offers several advantages over straight-set training. The most obvious advantage
is time. Because of the limited rest between exercises, superset workouts are
generally quicker to perform than other training methods that allow rest periods
between sets and exercises. Another advantage of supersets is that you’ll actually
be stronger in the second exercise. Research has found that a muscle will be
stronger if preceded immediately by a contraction of its antagonist, or opposing
muscle group. For example, when you do a superset of barbell curls and triceps
extensions, in that order, you’ll be stronger on the triceps extension and vice
versa. This happens because normally the muscle you’re training is somewhat
limited by its antagonist. When bench-pressing using straight sets, for instance,
the back muscles inhibit the contraction of your pecs to a certain extent. Doing a
set of rows shortly before benching, however, lessens this inhibitory effect,
allowing your pecs to contract more forcefully. As a result, you’ll be able to train
with more weight and get stronger and bigger. Another benefit to superset
training is enhanced recovery. When you alternate every set of triceps with a set
of biceps, you increase blood flow to those muscles because when you’re doing
curls, your triceps are still contracting, which increases blood flow to them and
aids in recovery. This helps your body remove waste products and damaged
muscle tissue as a result of exercise. Keep rest periods short between supersets
(1 to 2 minutes).
                        Compound-Set Training
Compound-set training is similar to superset training except that the two
exercises that are done back to back are performed for the same muscle group.
As an example for shoulders, a lifter would perform a set of shoulder presses and
immediately follow that set with a set of lateral raises with no break. That equals
one compound set. After the set of lateral raises is finished, the lifter would rest
for a couple of minutes and then start back with shoulder presses. This might be
performed for two or three compound sets. The compound can then be followed
with other shoulder exercises that are performed either in straight sets or as
another compound set. While the exercise choices are not that critical, there are
two strategies that are usually used with compound sets. Exercise choices can be
made either to target a different section of the desired muscle group (such as the
dumbbell shoulder press and the bent-over lateral raise) or to target a similar part
of the muscle group (such as the dumbbell shoulder press and the machine
shoulder press). The major benefits of compound-set training are intensity and
time. Training two exercises for one muscle group without any rest between
exercises significantly increases the intensity of the workout and places greater
demands on the muscle fibers being trained as well as on your entire body. It
also dramatically reduces the amount of time required to train a muscle group.
This makes it a great workout technique when you want to push a particular
muscle group beyond its comfort zone or when you are short on time. Because
compound-set training is a very high-intensity technique, you should use it
infrequently or for short periods, because overtraining is possible if done for too
long. See table 6.3 for a sample compound-set shoulder workout.
                             Tri-Set Training
Tri-set training is an extended compound set. It uses three exercises for the same
muscle group back to back with no rest between sets, as opposed to just two
exercises. For smaller muscle groups like biceps, triceps, and deltoids, one group
of tri-sets performed for two to four sets is typically enough to train the muscle
group effectively. When smart exercise choices are selected, one tri-set can
properly target all areas of most major muscle groups. As with compound-set
training, the major benefits of tri-set training are higher-intensity training and
less training time required. Of course, it also means that the technique should be
used infrequently and for short periods to prevent overtraining. See table 6.4 for
an example of a triceps tri-set workout.
                            Giant-Set Training
Giant-set training is similar to compound-set and tri-set training in that multiple
exercises are done for a single muscle group back to back with no rest between
sets. The difference is in the number of exercises performed. Giant sets
incorporate four or more exercises. Giant sets or tri-sets are a great way to
quickly hit any muscle group from a variety of angles. The benefits are similar to
those of compound and tri-sets. See table 6.5 for a sample giant-set routine for
abs.
Without taking a rest, perform one set of each exercise listed. Then rest for a few
minutes and follow the exercise order again.
                        High-Intensity Training
High-intensity training (HIT) is a method based on the one-set training concept
that was popularized by Arthur Jones (founder of Nautilus) and professional
bodybuilder Mike Mentzer. The foundation of this training method involves very
low volume and very high intensity. Most followers do as few as one set per
exercise and only one to three exercises per muscle group (see table 6.6).
Intensity for this technique is not so much about the weight used but about
training beyond the point of muscle failure. Every set must be taken beyond
failure with the use of forced reps, negative-rep training, and even partial-rep
training (where as much of the range of motion of the exercise is performed until
the weight cannot be budged). The theory behind HIT is that if multiple sets of
an exercise are performed, every set cannot be trained with maximal intensity.
By doing one and only one set of an exercise, you have a better chance of
training with maximal intensity.

Volume is also kept low with HIT to minimize the time spent in the gym.
Because volume is low with HIT, it allows the lifter to follow a whole-body
training split or a two-day training split, depending on whether the lifter wants to
train each muscle group two or three times per week.

There is no research to specifically support the theory of HIT, and anecdotal
reports are varied. Some lifters experience considerable gains in strength and
muscle mass. But for most, the progress soon comes to a halt. The problem may
lie in the fact that volume is an acute variable that does not get manipulated in
this program. Therefore, following HIT for only four to six weeks would be a
smart way to use it. After training with HIT you should switch to a training
program that uses fairly high volume. The sample HIT program in table 6.6 is a
two-day split done twice a week. In this program, each set should be preceded
with one short warm-up set before each exercise with approximately 50 percent
of the weight you will use for the main working set. Do only about four to six
reps with this lighter weight. Perform each set to muscle failure and have a
spotter help you perform three or four forced reps after reaching muscle failure.
Resist the negative portion of the forced reps for added intensity and consider
attempting a few partial reps at the very end of the set.
                        Nubret Pro-Set Method
This method, named after International Federation of Bodybuilding and fitness
professional bodybuilder Serge Nubret of France, incorporates a progression
method that increases the number of sets done on an exercise with each workout.
It also requires that you do that in the same amount of time as for the previous
workout. For example, if you do three sets of barbell curls for 10 reps in five
minutes in one workout, you must try to get four sets of 10 reps in five minutes
in the following workouts until you reach that goal. The only way to do more
sets in the same amount of time is to reduce your rest period between sets.
Therefore, this method increases strength and muscle mass by enhancing the
ability of the muscles to recover between sets. The best way to use this technique
is to do it first in your workout using one exercise for each muscle group. See
table 6.7 for a sample progression of the Nubret pro-set workout in which the
lifter required four weeks to increase his total work from three sets of 10 in five
minutes to four sets of 10 in five minutes.
      Programs That Manipulate Repetitions
Although the rep is the smallest part of the workout, manipulating it can lead to
big gains in muscle mass. The following training techniques alter the reps
performed in each workout. This can be done by using specific rep ranges, using
extremely high-rep training, dividing the reps up throughout the day, altering the
range of motion of specific reps, performing reps with additional help after
muscles have fatigued, changing the speed at which reps are performed, or
emphasizing a certain part of the rep. These all work to boost muscle growth one
rep at a time.

                              5–10–20 Training
This program is actually an advanced version of tri-sets (see Tri-Set Training
earlier in this chapter). With most tri-set programs you perform equal reps on all
three exercises, but this one uses very specific repetition ranges for each
exercise. The first exercise in the tri-set is done for just 5 reps. This is a good rep
range for boosting muscle strength. The second exercise is done for 10 reps. This
is the ideal rep range for building muscle mass. The last exercise in the tri-set is
done for 20 reps. This rep range enhances muscle endurance but also further
promotes muscle hypertrophy. Combining all three of these rep ranges gives you
a program that trains the muscles in every respect necessary to get them big,
lean, and strong.
Exercise selection plays an important role in the 5–10–20 program because of
the imposed rep ranges. The first exercise should be a basic exercise, preferably
using a barbell. Because the reps on this exercise are so low for building
strength, basic multijoint exercises with a barbell are best (see table 6.8 for
sample exercise choices for each exercise). The second exercise is done with a
moderate number of reps for putting on muscle size; therefore, it should be
another basic exercise (similar to the first) but performed with either dumbbells
or a machine. The third exercise is the high-rep set, so the best exercise choices
are single-joint isolation moves. These can be done with dumbbells, but cables
or machines are your preferred method to give your muscles continuous tension
throughout the entire range of motion.

Because this program is so demanding on the muscles and on your entire body,
you’ll need to get plenty of rest for optimal recovery. Allow each muscle group
trained with the 5–10–20 program at least five days of rest before training them
again. I suggest you plan on working each muscle group just once per week, as
shown in table 6.9. Remember that you can substitute these exercises for any of
the appropriate ones in table 6.8. Perform one set of each exercise, resting just
long enough to get set up on the next exercise. After the last exercise is
completed, rest two minutes before repeating in the same order. Repeat for a
total of two to four tri-sets. Follow the program for no longer than 6 weeks. This
is a fairly grueling regimen to maintain for any longer. But don’t think that you
have to train every body part with 5–10–20. You can choose to train just one or a
few of your troublesome body parts with the 5–10–20 program to bring them up
to par with the rest of you.
                          Finish Pump Method
This method involves training with basic exercises and heavy weight in the
beginning of the workout. For example, a chest workout would start with an
exercise such as the bench press for sets of 6 to 8 reps, and then continue with
the dumbbell press for sets of 8 to 10 reps, and then finish with dumbbell flys for
sets of 12 to 15 reps and cable crossovers for sets of 15 to 20. This concept takes
advantage of the enhanced blood flow from the higher-rep training to deliver
more water (which enters the muscle to create the pump), oxygen, nutrients, and
anabolic hormones to the muscles and help flush the waste products away from
the muscle at the end of the workout. This helps to enhance recovery and
stimulate muscle growth. See table 6.10 for a sample finish pump workout.
                            Hundreds Training
Hundreds training is an extremely hard-core method that incorporates very high
repetitions—100 reps per set, to be exact. The weight you will use to complete
100 reps is around 20 to 30 percent of a weight you can use for 10 strict reps.
For example, if you use 50-pound dumbbells for 10 reps on dumbbell curls, you
will use 10-to 15-pound dumbbells when you do hundreds training. Try the 10-
pound dumbbells to start, because you always want to start lighter than heavier.
Your goal is to perform at least 70 reps before you stop for a quick breather. That
is, you should fail before you reach 100 reps. If you can do all 100 reps with a
given weight, without stopping, then the weight is too light and you will need to
increase it for the next workout. You need to find a weight that allows you to
complete 60 to 70 reps without stopping. Your mark for increasing the weight is
when you can get 70 reps or more with a weight.

Let’s walk through a sample set of standing dumbbell curls using the hundreds
training approach. Grab your appropriately weighted dumbbells and perform
dumbbell curls as you normally would with a heavier weight. Keep your form on
the dumbbell curls strict as described in chapter 19 and keep your reps
moderately paced and under control at all times. If you chose the correct weight,
you will reach momentary muscle failure somewhere between rep 60 and rep 70.
Here’s where you get a rest but only for as many seconds as the number of reps
you have left to complete. In other words, rest 1 second for every remaining rep
you have left. If you completed 65 reps, then you rest 35 seconds, and then
attempt to do the remaining 35 reps. If you fail to complete those final 35, use
the same method—rest 1 second for every rep you have left until you reach the
100-rep mark. Sounds simple . . . until you actually try it. This method is only
for those with at least one full year of consistent strength training experience.
The benefit of hundreds training is how it incorporates the muscle fibers in the
muscle. Because the weight is so light and the reps are so high, it thoroughly
trains the slow-twitch muscle fibers in the beginning of the set. All muscles are
composed of two major types of muscle fibers—slow-twitch and fast-twitch
muscle fibers. Slow-twitch muscle fibers tend to be used for endurance-type
activities—therefore, higher reps tend to train them best. Fast-twitch muscle
fibers are used for more powerful activities—therefore, they are better trained
with heavy weight and low reps, or with fast, explosive-type movements. Most
muscles are close to 50 percent slow-twitch and 50 percent fast-twitch muscle
fibers. This means it’s a good idea to use techniques that train both types of
muscle fibers. With hundreds training you will hit the slow-twitch muscle fibers
during the first 60 reps or so. After that, your muscles will have to call on the
fast-twitch muscle fibers to help out the fatigued slow-twitch fibers. Doing this
many repetitions causes biochemical changes in the muscle, which aid in muscle
growth. It also leads to greater growth of blood vessels that feed the muscle
fibers to enhance the delivery of blood, oxygen, nutrients, and hormones to the
muscle cells. This environment increases the growth potential of the muscle
fibers.

The best way to use hundreds training is to train each muscle group twice per
week. Therefore, following an upper-and lower-body training split or a two-day
is ideal with this style of training. The only difference is that you can do up to
three exercises for larger muscle groups (chest, back, and quadriceps) because
you perform only one set per exercise with hundreds training. Try hundreds
training for about two to four weeks; it is very intense and will be difficult to
follow for any longer. Then follow it with a standard mass training that uses
heavy weight and low reps. Another way to use hundreds training is to
sporadically train one muscle group or your entire body with hundreds training
for just one or two workouts to change your training style and shock the muscles
for added growth. See table 6.11 for a sample training regimen using the
hundreds training technique. Each of the workouts in this program is to be done
twice weekly. For instance, you can do workout 1 on Monday and Thursday and
workout 2 on Tuesday and Friday. Or you can allow a day of rest between every
workout and do workout 1 on Monday and Friday and workout 2 on Wednesday
and Sunday.
                               50–50 Method
This program helps to bring up the development of lagging muscle groups.
Simply stated, this program involves the completion of 100 reps per day on one
exercise for any body part that you deem is behind in growth. It is different from
hundreds training in that you don’t perform all 100 reps at one time, plus you do
this for one muscle group every day for eight weeks. By doing so many reps
every day, you enhance the endurance capacity of the muscle. Enhanced
endurance is facilitated by an increase in the capillary density of the muscle.
Capillary density refers to the number of capillaries (small blood vessels where
nutrient and gas exchange take place between the blood and the muscle cells) a
muscle is supplied with. Muscle hypertrophy tends to lower the capillary density
because of the greater amount of muscle present. This also happens with low-
rep, heavy-weight training, because this style of training forces the muscle to
rely more on the energy it can derive within the muscle cell, not from the blood.
By doing the 50–50 method, you can boost the capillary density of a muscle and
therefore enhance the delivery of nutrients, anabolic hormones, and oxygen to
the muscle. In addition, you enhance the removal of biochemical waste products
from the muscle. This results in bigger muscle pumps, more rapid recovery of
the muscle, and ultimately greater potential for muscle growth.

To follow the 50–50 method, choose the muscle group you want to bring up to
par with the others. Then choose one exercise for that muscle group. This will be
the exercise you will do every day, even on the days you don’t normally train
that muscle group. See table 6.12 for a list of the best exercises to use with the
50–50 method. You will need to perform 100 reps a day of that exercise in two
segments in the day. That means you will perform 50 reps at a time, separated by
about 8 to 12 hours, with a weight that challenges you but is not so heavy it
causes you to fatigue by the 50th rep. For example, if you want to build up your
biceps, you will do 50 reps of dumbbell curls in the morning—say at 9:00 a.m.
—and again in the evening—maybe at 9:00 p.m. The weight you use is critical
to your success. If it’s too heavy, then it is likely to lead to overtraining. A good
rule is that when you reach the 50th rep you should feel as though you could
complete about 10 more reps. Follow this program for no more than eight weeks
to see decent results and prevent stagnation. You can, however, switch to other
muscle groups and continue the 50–50 method.
21s
This is an advanced method of training that challenges the working muscle
group in three different ranges of motion within a single set. Its name comes
from the total number of reps per set you perform with this training technique. In
each set, you do a total of 21 repetitions but as three separate sets of 7 reps. You
start the set from the start position and do 7 reps through the first half of the
range of motion (see table 6.13). After you complete the first 7 reps, you do
another 7 reps but only through the last half of the range of motion. When those
7 are complete, you finish with 7 reps through the full range of motion of that
exercise. Using the barbell curl as an example, you start with your arms fully
extended, holding a barbell across the front of your thighs. First you curl the
weight up 7 times only to the point where your arms are parallel with the floor.
Then you curl the weight up 7 times from the point where your arms are parallel
with the floor to the point where they are close to your shoulders. After these 7
reps, you perform 7 standard barbell curls going through the full range of
motion.

The 21s can be done with virtually any exercise but are most practical with
single-joint isolation movements. Multijoint exercises, like the bench press and
squat, involve so many secondary and stabilizing muscles that straight sets prove
the most effective. See table 6.13 for a sample of the best exercises to use with
21s. Regardless of the exercise, you’ll need to use lighter resistance than usual
when doing 21s, since your muscles are unaccustomed to the increased number
of reps. Using cables or machines for this training technique is an excellent way
to maintain continuous tension on the muscle. This is especially important,
because the tension on the muscle is typically decreased at full flexion when you
use free weights.

With 21s you can most effectively work on flexibility within the joint during the
first 7 reps, since you begin each rep with the working muscle in a fully
stretched position. The middle 7 reps are most productive in terms of muscle
growth and development, because you’re stronger in the second half of the
movement and you can squeeze the contraction at the top for maximum peaking.
The last 7 reps essentially serve the purpose of burning out the muscles, which is
great for initiating new growth.

To work 21s into your current routine, do three sets of them as the first exercise
for a body part (after a proper warm-up, of course), then resume with straight
sets for all other movements in that body-part workout. Or do one to three sets of
21s as the last exercise for a particular body part to burn it out. To avoid
overtraining, decrease your volume for the body part you’re doing 21s with by
doing one fewer exercise in that workout. If on chest day you normally do three
or four exercises, do two or three if you’re doing three sets of 21s. Beginners
should start off with only one set of 21s—remember, this is an advanced
technique. You can increase to 2 or 3 sets after a couple of sessions. Follow this
program for about four to eight weeks, and no more, because it loses its
effectiveness after about eight weeks.
                             Four-Rep System
This program involves four different exercises for each muscle group. Each
exercise is designed to hit the muscle from a variety of angles and provide a
unique stimulus to the muscle. After a thorough warm-up, the first exercise
should be a basic exercise (see table 6.14) and done for three sets of four reps.
This rep range provides a stimulus for gains in strength. The second exercise can
be another basic exercise, preferably a dumbbell version, or it can be an isolation
exercise that minimizes the help of assistance muscle groups. Completing three
sets of eight reps will provide the best stimulus for muscle growth. The third
exercise should be an isolation exercise, performed for three sets of 12 reps. This
rep number will provide a potent stimulus for muscle growth and will encourage
biochemical changes in the muscle that will enhance muscle growth and
endurance (the ability to do more repetitions with a given weight). The last
exercise should be done for three sets of 16 reps to provide a significant pump to
the muscle. This will drive more fluid into the muscle cells, and the stretch this
provides is believed to stimulate muscle growth. This final exercise can be either
an isolation exercise or a basic exercise for that given muscle group, depending
on what exercise was done for the second exercise.

Because of the higher volume involved with this program, you should split your
workouts into three separate body regions. For instance, workout 1 could be
chest, shoulders, triceps, and abs; workout 2 could be back and biceps; and
workout 3 could be thighs, calves, and abs. Depending on how well you recover,
you may consider training each muscle group just once a week on the four-rep
system. An alternative way to do the four-rep system is to perform four sets of
each exercise. The first set will be done for 4 reps, the second set for 8 reps, the
third set for 12 reps, and the last set for 16 reps. Do this with two or three
exercises per muscle group. See table 6.15 for a sample back and biceps routine
using the alternative four-rep system.
                           Forced Repetitions
Forced repetitions allow you to get more reps on a set by having a spotter help
you finish the set after you have reached failure. This lets you push your muscles
to their limits and beyond, which is important for forcing muscle growth. After
you have reached failure on a set, the spotter can help you to perform an extra
two or three reps that you wouldn’t have been able to get without help. Doing
forced reps on the last set of an exercise is all you’ll need to get a jump on
muscle growth. Researchers suggest that one way that forced reps seem to work
so well for pushing muscle growth. A study of 16 male athletes discovered that
forced-rep training increased levels of growth hormone after training by almost
three times more than a standard workout, as shown in figure 6.1 (Ahtianen,
Pakarinen, Kraemer, and Hakkinen 2003). Growth hormone is an important
anabolic hormone that is believed to be involved in stimulating the processes
that drive muscle growth. Ahtianen and colleagues also studied muscle recovery
after forced-rep training. They discovered that up to three days after the forced-
rep workout the subjects’ trained muscles had not fully recovered. Therefore,
when using forced-rep training you should allow the trained muscle groups at
least four and up to seven days of rest before training them again. You should
use forced-rep training for no more than four weeks for any muscle group.
 Figure 6.1 This graph depicts the response of the elevated growth hormone
  seen when subjects perform a forced-rep workout versus a normal workout.
    Significantly different ( = p < 0.05, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001) from
 corresponding preexercise value. #Statistically significant difference (# = p <
     0.05, ## = p < 0.01) between the maximum rep vs. forced rep loadings.




Reprinted, by permission, from J.P. Ahtiainen, A. Pakarinen, W.J. Kraemer and K. Häkkinen, 2003, “Acute
hormonal and neuromuscular responses and recovery to forced vs. maximum repetitions multiple resistance
    exercises,” International Journal of Sports Medicine 24(6): 410-418. © Georg Thieme Verlag KG.


                                Negative Repetitions
Like forced reps, negative reps for building size are best used at the end of a set
when your muscles have reached failure. After you can no longer complete any
more positive reps with a given weight, you can still do several negative reps.
This is because muscles are much stronger on the negative portion of an
exercise. Negative-rep training lets you take advantage of this fact and the fact
that this high-intensity technique can spur new growth when done from time to
time. Using negative-rep training for boosting muscle growth is different from
using negative-rep training to improve muscle strength. For using negative-rep
training to enhance muscle strength, see chapter 9. Resisting the weight down on
the eccentric, or negative, portion of an exercise causes definite muscle damage.
When muscle fibers are damaged, it sets off a cascade of steps that leads to
muscle growth. It also develops protection from further eccentric overloading.
That is why you want to use this technique infrequently. Once a tolerance for it
has been built, the muscle damage is much less. Therefore, stopping after you
have used it once or twice for a muscle group is the wisest way to add this
technique to your training program. Then take a break from it for at least two
months. You will need to do only two or three negative reps at the end of the last
set for each exercise you do. Have a spotter or two—depending on the amount of
weight you use—help you perform the positive portion of each rep. During the
negative part of the rep, you should attempt to resist the weight by allowing it to
slowly force your muscles through the negative repetition. It should take you no
less than about three seconds to lower the weight through the negative rep. If
you cannot resist the weight for at least three seconds, do not perform any more
negative reps and finish the set.
                      Slow-Repetition Training
Slow-repetition training is a technique in which the repetitions are performed at
a very slow speed. Although the term slow-repetition training covers a broad
spectrum of possibilities, the most popular method is known as superslow
training. This method requires you to slow your rep speed down to 10 seconds
on the positive portion of the lift and an additional 10 seconds on the negative
portion. You should use a weight that is about 50 to 70 percent of the weight you
normally lift and attempt to complete 5 to 10 reps per set. Because of the intense
nature of slow contractions, you need to perform only about two or three
exercises per muscle group and only two sets per exercise. You should also allow
five to seven days of rest for all major muscle groups trained with superslow
training. Try this workout method for four to six weeks before changing to a
different routine that involves normal-speed reps. Another way to incorporate
superslow training into your lifting program is to do it every other workout for
each muscle group or throw in one superslow rep set each workout for any
muscle group—do it either at the beginning or at the end of the workout. There
are many benefits to superslow training that make it an effective technique for
adding muscle mass. It minimizes the momentum of the weight to maximize the
force placed on the muscle being trained. It helps you to develop the connection
between mind and muscle, because the slow movement forces you to concentrate
on the muscle contraction. It progressively fatigues all the fibers of the muscles
involved. It minimizes the risk of injury from poorly performed exercise
movements. And it reduces the stress placed on the joints.
                           Speed-Set Training
By combining fast reps, slow reps, and normal reps into each set, you can do
three things: increase strength, increase lean muscle, and decrease fat. The fast
reps, like all explosive moves, build power, or the ability to generate strength
very quickly. The slow reps build strength by keeping muscles under tension for
a longer period. The longer they have to support the weight, the more damaged
they get, and hence the more muscle they will develop. And ending each set with
the normal reps increases muscular endurance. See table 6.16 for the Speed-Set
Training program.

Each set has 15 reps. Reps 1 to 5 are the explosive reps, executed superfast. Reps
6 to 10 are excruciatingly slow, taking five seconds on the positive and another
five seconds on the negative. And reps 11 to 15 are done at your normal pace (or
roughly 1 to 2 seconds up and the same back down). Because of the intensity of
this regimen, you’ll pick a weight at which you could normally do 20 to 25 reps.

Avoid unilateral (single-arm or -leg) exercises. Doing 15 reps (five of them
ultraslow) per set takes a long time, and if you’re doing something like dumbbell
rows or presses on each side, it could put too much strain on your stabilizer and
core muscle groups. To spare your core muscles, I recommend incorporating
machines, particularly the Smith machine, which also allows you to exert
maximum explosive power on the fast reps.

This regimen is ideal for training opposing muscle groups in each workout,
pairing chest with back, biceps with triceps, shoulders with calves, and legs with
abs. That way, you ensure that each muscle group gets the full benefit of
training. Because the rep level is high and the technique is so intense, you could
very easily burn out, say, your triceps while training your chest, making it
impossible for your triceps to benefit from this type of training on the same day.
Start by doing two sets per exercise during weeks 1 and 2 and build up to three
sets per exercise during weeks 3 and 4. Rest should be about one to two minutes
between each set. Follow this regimen for four weeks maximum at a time, and
then go back to your normal training.
                           Four-Minute Muscle
To do the Four-Minute Muscle technique, you select a weight on each exercise
that allows you to perform 15 to 19 reps before reaching muscle failure. You will
lift this weight for a total of four minutes, taking short rest breaks each time you
reach muscle failure. The goal is to see how many reps you can complete in
these four minutes and to progressively increase the total number of reps you can
complete over several weeks. You should be able to complete at least 40 reps in
four minutes the first week you use this technique. The goal is to complete 60
reps in four minutes after four to six weeks.

The week before taking this journey, use all the exercises as listed and find the
weight on each exercise that allows you to complete a minimum of 15 reps and a
maximum of 19 reps. The weight you select is critical to your success. A weight
that allows you to do fewer than 15 reps will be too heavy to ever get you close
to the 60-rep goal in four to six weeks. A weight that allows you to get more than
19 reps will be too easy and will enable you to reach the goal of 60 reps in less
than four weeks. Do only enough sets per exercise to determine the proper
weight to use and then move on to the next exercise. Do all the exercises in each
workout in the order listed.

There are two main ways that you can go about training with the Four-Minute
Muscle program. The first way is to go to failure and then rest as little as
possible before picking up the weight and going to failure again and continuing
in this fashion until the four minutes are up. The problem with this strategy is
that there is no way to advance the number of total reps you can complete other
than hoping that you will increase muscle endurance each time you train this
way, which should allow you to complete more reps in that four-minute window.

A smarter strategy is to pace yourself by sticking with a set amount of rest time
between sets. The first time you do this workout, rest 20 seconds between sets
each time you hit failure. Do this again in week 2. Then in week 3, drop your
rest to 15 seconds between sets each time you hit muscle failure. Do this again in
week 4. If you do not hit the goal of 60 reps in week 4, drop to 10 seconds of rest
between sets in weeks 5 and 6, and you should hit your goal of 60 reps or at least
very close to 60 reps.

If you don’t hit the 60-rep mark by the end of the six weeks on all exercises,
don’t worry about it. Hitting the 60-rep goal is not critical to the results you will
have. The results you can you expect in four to six weeks on this program are
bigger muscle size, less body fat, and an increase in muscle endurance. Muscle
endurance means that you will be able to complete more reps with a given
weight. For example, if you can complete 10 reps with 70-pound dumbbells on
the dumbbell bench press, you can expect to be getting a solid 12 to 15 reps with
that same weight. It also means you’ll be able to use heavier dumbbells (say 75-
or 80-pounders) to get those same 10 reps.

The reason this program delivers all of this is manifold. For starters, because you
are doing an exercise for four minutes with minimal rest between sets, you will
be burning many more calories than when you do normal sets with two to three
minutes of rest between sets. This will also mean you will still be burning more
calories when the workout is over. All of that leads to some serious fat burning.
Training this way will also place your muscles under a lot of metabolic stress.
That means you’ll be creating waste products in your muscles, such as lactate.
The metabolic waste products will instigate a higher release of anabolic
hormones like growth hormone, testosterone, and insulin-like growth factor-I
(IGF-I), which will stimulate muscle growth. Plus dealing with these waste
products will train your body to better handle and dispose of them. That will
increase your muscle endurance, which will result in strength increases. Going
for four minutes with minimal rest like this will also place a lot of mechanical
stress on the muscles (muscle damage). That will lead to further gains in muscle
size. And training this way is so unique compared to how you have previously
trained that it will simply shock your muscles into responding by growing bigger
and stronger. That’s the principle known as muscle confusion. See table 6.17,
Four-Minute Muscle Mayhem, for the full workout.
Try this program for four to six weeks. Rest about two to three minutes between
exercises.
           Programs That Manipulate Load
Because strength training involves lifting weights or resistance, the most
fundamental change that can be done to manipulate a training program is to alter
the amount of weight used. The following programs do just that—they
manipulate the load, or resistance. This can be done by altering sets of heavy
weight and light weight within a single workout or on each exercise during a
workout. Some of these techniques alter the weight during a set. Regardless of
the time line, the result from each of these is greater muscle mass.

                       Heavy and Light Method
This technique simply incorporates several heavy sets of an exercise followed by
several light sets of that same exercise. The theory is that the heavy sets will
stimulate the fast-twitch muscle fibers better while the lighter sets promote
capillarization of the muscles and induce fatigue. This is often done with just one
exercise, as shown in table 6.18. More experienced bodybuilders will sometimes
do two exercises but with fewer total sets on each exercise. With this method, the
first exercise (which is typically a basic or multijoint movement) is done with
heavy weight and low reps, while the second exercise (which is often an
isolation-type exercise) is done with very light weight and high reps (see table
6.19). For both programs, the exercises would be completed over a three-or four-
day split. For example, workout 1 might be shoulders and thighs; workout 2
could train chest, back, and abs; workout 3 might complete the split with biceps,
triceps, and calves.
                             Triangle Method
The triangle method is a basic pyramid training system. The term pyramid refers
to a stepwise increase and decrease in weight used with each set of an exercise.
The triangle method starts off with three or four ascending sets. The first two or
three are warm-up sets that are not taken to failure. The third or fourth set
usually consists of a weight that allows for only four to six reps. After that set
the weight is progressively lowered and the reps increase for another two or
three sets. See table 6.20 for a sample workout using the triangle method. The
benefit of the triangle method is that it allows you to slowly prepare the targeted
muscle for very heavy weight. This helps to prevent injury. In addition, this
method of training allows for varied rep ranges, which provide different stimuli
to the trained muscles.
                         Rack Pyramid Method
This pyramid method is named after the dumbbell rack because it is best used
with preset dumbbells found in most gyms. As with the triangle method, you
start with a very light weight for 10 reps to warm up. Then you gradually
increase the weights of each set by the smallest increase available (usually five
pounds each dumbbell) until you can perform only one repetition. After that, if
you’re really up for punishing your muscles, reverse the order and decline in
weight by the smallest decrease possible until you reach your starting point. Rest
between sets should be kept to a minimum—about one to two minutes. The
benefits of the rack pyramid method are similar to those of the triangle method
in that it allows a proper warm-up for preparing the muscle for the intense
training task ahead. It also provides a very broad range of reps for a variety of
training stimuli to the muscle. It also gives the muscle an intense workout that is
sure to kick-start muscle growth. Because this method is rather grueling on the
targeted muscles, it’s wise to use the rack pyramid method infrequently. It is best
thrown into a workout to stimulate a lagging muscle group to grow. One
beneficial way to use the rack pyramid method is to use it for one exercise per
muscle group. The best exercises to use this method with are the basic dumbbell
mass builders and isolation exercises. See table 6.21 for optimal exercises to use
with the rack pyramid method. Table 6.22 provides a sample rack pyramid
workout for the dumbbell biceps curl.
                             Inverted Pyramid
This pyramid system is the opposite of the triangle method. You simply start
heavy, work down in weight, and then work back up. Because it is so difficult, it
is one of the more uncommon methods of pyramid training. One example is that
used by professional bodybuilder Dean Tornabane. You begin with a weight you
can perform 6 to 10 reps with on your exercise of choice. Perform two more sets,
in which you decrease the weight each set just enough to allow you to perform
the same number of reps as you did on the first set. After the third set, you will
do two more sets, increasing the weight by the same increments by which you
decreased the weights previously. Because of the fatigue involved, the last two
sets will likely be in the low repetition range of two to four. This is supposed to
work synergistically with the higher-rep sets performed in the earlier sets to
enhance muscle growth. See table 6.23 for a sample inverted pyramid program.
This system can be performed with any exercise for most muscle groups, but it is
best performed first in the workout with a basic exercise such as the bench press,
shoulder press, squat, barbell curl, or triceps extension. This is best followed
with straight sets of one or two isolation exercises for each muscle group.
                             Oxford Method
The Oxford descending pyramid technique uses the back half of the triangle
pyramid method. The benefit of the Oxford method is that it allows the heaviest
weight to be used on the first working set before the muscles are fatigued by
previous working sets with lighter weight. With this descending pyramid
technique, the first set is done with 100 percent of the 10RM to failure. Of
course, this should be preceded by one or two light warm-up sets. On the second
and third sets the weight is reduced just enough to allow you to complete 10 reps
to failure. The Oxford seems to work well for gaining muscle mass because each
set is done to muscle failure. Muscle failure is important for inducing muscle
growth. The reason is that reaching muscle failure stimulates the release of
growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). Although the
Oxford method is typically described using 10 reps per set, it can also be used
with other rep ranges, such as 6, 8, 12, or even 15 reps per set. See table 6.24
(Oxford Mass) for a sample program using the Oxford descending pyramid
technique. This can be followed for four to six weeks before switching to a
different training method.
                                Breakdowns
This technique was devised by Fred Hatfield, PhD, and used successfully by
professional bodybuilder Mike Quinn. It involves three distinct repetition ranges
for each of the three total sets that are performed. Set 1 works with heavy weight
(a weight that limits you to 4 to 6 reps per set to work the fast-twitch muscle
fibers). Set 2 is performed using 15 to 20 percent less weight than with set 1.
This should allow about 10 to 15 repetitions to be performed and enhances the
biochemical milieu within the muscle cells to stimulate muscle growth. The last
set, set 3, is performed with about 50 percent less weight than the first set, such
that 25 to 30 reps are performed for training the slow-twitch muscle fibers. Rest
periods between sets should be about 2 to 3 minutes. See table 6.25 for a sample
breakdown workout for triceps.
                             Drop-Set Training
Drop-set training involves an immediate reduction in the amount of weight being
used so that you can continue to complete more reps for that given exercise. For
example, if you can do 10 reps of barbell curls with 100 pounds on the bar, you
would first complete 10 reps and then put the bar down to quickly strip off about
20-30 percent (or about 20-30 pounds). You immediately perform as many reps
as possible with that weight before putting it down and stripping another 20-30
percent off the bar and doing more reps. This can continue as many times as you
like, although most bodybuilders do one or three drops per drop set. Regardless
of how many drops are done per drop set, it is counted as only one set. Most
bodybuilders perform about two or three drop sets per exercise. Choose two
exercises per muscle group, usually one compound exercise and one isolation
exercise, and do three drop sets for each. Another way to use drop-set training is
to do the last set of every exercise as a drop set.

The benefit of drop-set training is similar to that of forced-rep training in that it
lets you push your muscles beyond their limits. Forcing the muscles to continue
contracting with lighter weight will cause an elevated response of growth
hormone and IGF-I. The trick is to keep the rest between drops to a minimum.
It’s a good idea to have a spotter help you strip the weight or use dumbbells for
the quickest drops in weight. See table 6.26 for a sample drop-set scheme for
shoulder training using dumbbell presses and lateral raises. This is a good way to
end a shoulder workout if it is preceded by shoulder presses and upright rows.
Follow a similar plan for other muscle groups.
    Programs That Manipulate Rest Periods
Few bodybuilders realize that an effective way to alter training programs to keep
their progress involves manipulating the rest periods between sets. This changes
the biochemical adaptations the muscles undergo by altering the type of fuel
(ATP, creatine phosphate, or glycogen) they rely on during sets and to recover
with between sets. The chemicals produced from the use of different fuels can
stimulate certain biochemical pathways involved in the process of muscle
growth. The following programs change the rest periods between sets in an effort
to stimulate muscle growth. This can be done by decreasing the rest between sets
from workout to workout or by limiting the amount of rest between sets.

                              Rest Rundown
This is a program where rest time between sets is reduced by about 15 seconds
every consecutive workout. The program starts with three-minute rest periods
between sets and progressively drops to about 15 seconds over a 12-week
period. The goal is to use the same weight for the same amount of reps each
week. While that doesn’t seem like progress when looking at the resistance used
and the repetitions completed, it is remarkable progress when considering the
drastic reductions in rest time. This trains the biochemical pathways in the
muscle to allow the muscle to recover faster and allows for more reps to be
performed with a given weight. The ability to do the same number of reps with
the same weight with less rest time between sets translates to greater muscle
growth. In fact, as discussed in chapter 5, research shows that participants
following an eight-week strength-training program that decreased the rest period
between sets by 15 seconds every week had greater gains in muscle mass than
those keeping rest periods steady at two minutes (Souza-Junior et al. 2011). Stay
at a rest range if you cannot complete reps in the under-two-minute range. See
table 6.27 for a sample weekly progression of the rest rundown program for an
athlete who trains each body part once per week. Bodybuilders often use the rest
rundown method to prepare for competition. This is believed to help with muscle
definition and to decrease body fat because the workout is similar to an aerobic-
type workout.
                  Alternating Rest-Pause Program
This variation on Rest-Pause training is a unique way to train using single-arm
and single-leg exercises. As you work one side of the body, the opposite side is
resting. You cycle back and forth from one side to the other. To do this, choose a
weight that allows you to complete about 6 to 8 reps. We will use one-arm
dumbbell curls as an example. Do 3 reps of curls on the right arm and
immediately switch to the left arm and do 3 reps of curls on the left arm. Then
switch to the right arm for 3 more reps of curls. Continue in this fashion resting
for 3 reps, then resting for 2 reps, and finally resting for 1 rep. In the end you
complete 14 reps per set with a weight you normally could do for only 6 to 8
reps. You basically double the amount of reps you can do with a given weight.
That pushes not only muscle growth but muscle strength as well. And because
you are using one limb at a time, you are stronger than you are when you use
two arms. That is, when you perform single-arm exercises, like a one-arm
dumbbell curl, you can curl more weight than half of what you could curl on a
barbell using both arms, which leads to even greater gains in muscle strength.
On the last set of each exercise, do as many reps as you can on the final rest that
is supposed to be just one rep. Not only will this increase the intensity on the last
set, but it will also serve as a barometer for the appropriateness of the weight you
selected. If you can do more than one rep on the final rest of the final set of an
exercise, increase the weight by 5 to 10 pounds the next workout. If you can
complete only one rep on the final rest of the final set, then the weight you
selected is perfect. If you can’t complete the final rep on the final set, then
during the next workout reduce the weight by 5 to 10 pounds. If you can’t
complete the final rep on any of the first two sets, then reduce the weight by 5 to
10 pounds on the next set.

Follow the Alternating Rest-Pause program in table 6.28 for four weeks and then
switch to a new training program.
                             Quality Training
Quality training is a system that keeps the rest periods between sets at 1 minute
or less regardless of the exercise or weight used. Many bodybuilders swear by
this technique for adding muscle mass and, therefore, always keep their rest
periods under a minute regardless of how heavily they are training. From a
physiological standpoint, there is some evidence to support the anecdotal reports.
Keeping rest periods between sets to a minimum will cause lactate levels to
reach fairly high levels. Since lactate levels are associated with GH levels, the
GH response, as well as the IGF-I response (which is associated with GH
levels), would be higher with this type of training. See table 6.29 for a sample
quality training workout for triceps.
                         Power Circuit Training
This is a type of circuit training that involves the use of basic power movements
with heavy weight. Typical circuit training involves the use of machines and
very light weight. What they both have in common is that the goal is to move
from one exercise to the next with no scheduled rest between exercises. Instead
of doing several sets for an exercise, you would do only one set of an exercise
before moving to a new exercise. In the end, you will complete several sets of
each exercise after running through the circuit several times.

Power circuits are designed to increase strength and muscle size while helping
decrease body fat. The continuous movement of circuit training keeps your
metabolism high through the whole workout. Research studies show that
keeping rest periods under 30 seconds burns the most calories regardless of how
much weight is used and how many reps are performed. Research also suggests
that fat use by the body after exercise is increased more with power circuits than
with a traditional weightlifting program. With power circuits the lifter does about
30 total reps for each body part with a weight that is about 75 to 85 percent of
the one-rep max (or a weight that could be lifted for 8 to 10 reps). With power
circuits it is wise to use either a training partner who can watch the clock or a
watch to monitor exercise time. Each exercise in the circuit is performed for 15
seconds. The goal is to complete as many reps as possible in those 15 seconds
before moving on to the next exercise without resting. When a total of 30 reps
have been completed for an exercise, the exercise is eliminated from the circuit
and a 15-second rest period is set in its place on the following circuit rounds. For
example, if you complete 17 reps on the first pass through the circuit and 13 the
second time through, on your third trip through the circuit, instead of doing more
calf raises, you would stop and rest for that 15 seconds before moving on to the
next exercise.

The order of exercises in the circuit will affect the level of muscle fatigue that is
reached during the power circuit. It is wise to alternate upper-and lower-body
exercises to allow the muscles to recover and delay fatigue when doing power
circuits, such as in table 6.30. Whenever possible, push and pull exercises should
be alternated as well. For instance, if the power circuit starts with a pulling
exercise such as pull-downs and then moves to a lower-body exercise such as the
leg press for the quads, the next upper-body exercise should then be a pushing
exercise such as the bench press, and the next lower-body exercise could be a leg
curl for the hamstrings. Ideally, the power circuit should be completed in less
than 25 minutes. Full-body power circuits can be done twice a week as long as at
least two days of rest are allowed between workouts.
Programs That Manipulate Exercise Selection
There are hundreds of strength training exercises that can be performed (see part
V for a complete listing of common strength training exercises). With so many
exercises to choose from for each muscle group, it only makes sense that one
way to design a training program is through manipulation of exercise choices.
This can be done by changing the order of compound and isolation exercises for
a given muscle group, making minute changes in the way exercises are
performed (changes in grip or spacing of feet), limiting the workout to a specific
type of equipment, or performing exercises that train only one side of the body.
All such methods can be effective means of increasing your muscle size.

                           Preexhaust Training
This training method involves performing an isolation exercise before a
multijoint exercise for that same muscle group. The point is to fatigue the muscle
being trained with the isolation exercise so that it becomes the weak link in the
multijoint exercise. For instance, an isolated muscle group such as the deltoids is
fatigued (or preexhausted) with a single-joint exercise, such as the dumbbell
lateral raise, before training it with a heavier, compound movement such as the
dumbbell shoulder press. The reason for this is that the compound exercise
involves the targeted muscle as well as at least one assistance muscle. During the
shoulder press, the deltoids are assisted by the triceps. While this helps to lift
more weight on the compound exercise, it can limit the muscle fatigue the
targeted muscle receives. This is especially true if the assistance muscle is much
weaker than the targeted muscle. If this is true, then often the exercise ends when
the assistance muscle, not the targeted muscle, has fatigued.

Preexhaust works to fatigue the primary muscle group via the isolation exercise
so that it can be further fatigued on the compound exercise that follows. Of
course, the strength of the targeted muscle will be compromised on the second
exercise. This prevents most bodybuilders from using the preexhaust method
regularly, yet some use it specifically to limit the amount of weight they can use
on the compound exercise. If a bodybuilder has an injury that is aggravated by a
specific compound move, preexhaust training will limit the amount of weight he
or she can use on the set and thus limit the overall stress placed on the injured
muscle or joint. Preexhaust can be followed for four to six weeks or done for
each body part once every four to six workouts. See table 6.31 for good exercise
choices to pair up for preexhaust training. For a routine, do three sets of 10 to 15
reps on the first exercise and three sets of 6 to 10 reps on the second. Or to use
this system as a compound set, do one set of 10 to 15 reps on the first exercise
and immediately follow with one set of 6 to 10 reps on the second one. Rest
about two to three minutes and repeat this process twice. Regardless of which
method you choose, follow the preexhaust pairs with one other exercise for that
muscle group done in straight-set fashion.
                         Extended-Set Training
This is a unique method that uses several variations of one exercise. The
variations of that exercise are ordered from hardest to easiest. An example of this
can be explained using the dumbbell bench press. The hardest version of the
dumbbell bench press is on an incline bench set between 30 and 45 degrees.
Doing a dumbbell bench press on a flat bench is easier than doing an incline
dumbbell bench press but harder than doing a decline dumbbell bench press.
Thus, an example of extended-set training using the dumbbell bench press would
be to do one set of incline dumbbell bench press followed immediately by one
set of dumbbell bench press on a flat bench using the same amount of weight
and finishing with one set of decline dumbbell bench press with the same
weight. Because the rest time is minimal between each bench adjustment, these
three exercises can be considered one extended set.

Each adjustment with extended-set training places the body in a position that is
stronger than the previous position. This makes the weight easier to lift on each
successive position change, allowing you to continue doing more reps, when
normally you would have failed if your body position had not changed. Not only
does this allow you to train with more intensity, but the change in body position
also increases the number of muscle fibers targeted in each specific muscle
group.

To follow extended-set training, first choose a weight that normally limits you to
four or five reps on the first exercise (even though you will attempt no more than
four reps). For each change in exercise movement for that extended set, you will
attempt two to four reps. Do not do more than four reps on any exercise except
on the final movement of the extended set. You can work to failure on the last
exercise of all extended sets. If you have three or four exercise changes per
extended set, you will have a total of about 7 to 16 reps. So in essence, you are
using a weight on each movement that is best for strength gains, but at the end of
the extended set the total reps that the muscle group has performed fall in the
range that is optimal for muscle growth.

The first exercise movement should be the exercise that your body is weakest at
compared to all other exercises in the extended set. Each successive exercise
movement in the extended set should be one that your body is stronger at
compared to the previous exercise yet weaker than the one that follows. Rest
time between sets will always be minimal but can be varied depending on the
biomechanical advantage gained in the proceeding set. Some exercises will be
dramatically easier than the previous one; for these, rest should involve changing
only your body position. Some exercises provide a minimal biomechanical
advantage; for these you may rest up to 15 seconds before performing. Rest
between extended sets for three to four minutes. Perform between one and three
sets for each extended set, depending on the number of exercise movements used
in the extended set and the number of years training experience you have.

This is an extremely advanced training technique because it involves heavy
weight with very little rest. These two training techniques are usually at
opposition to one another, meaning you either train heavy or fast, but rarely ever
both—until now.

For most bodybuilders, doing one extended set will suffice. This will depend on
the amount of exercise movements you include in each extended set as well as
your training experience. Some extended sets involve as few as two different
movements (such as with shrugs), while some include as many as nine (such as
with the ultimate biceps extended set). See examples of extended sets in table
6.32. The more exercise movements per extended set, the fewer total extended
sets you will need. Most lifters will need about two or three extended sets for the
trap workout, while many will struggle to finish one ultimate biceps extended
set.

You can incorporate extended sets into your training in a number of ways. You
can do one extended set per muscle group along with other straight sets for that
muscle group. You can do one giant extended set per muscle group. Or you can
choose two different extended sets for each muscle group—as long as they
complement each other and do not mimic exercise movements. Follow
extended-set training for about 4 to 6 weeks, and follow it with a training
program that incorporates standard sets and higher reps such as the finish pump
method or triangle training method. Do not return to extended-set training for at
least 12 weeks. There are several reasons for this. The first is the intensity factor,
as described previously. The other problem is exercise order. With this style of
training, many of the basic movements are trained toward the end of the
extended set. This is the reverse order of a typical bodybuilding workout.
                          Small-Angle Training
Small-angle training is similar to extended set in concept. It uses multiple
variations of a single exercise to ensure that all muscle fibers in a muscle are
adequately trained.

To understand the concept of exercise angles, you need to know the basic
structure of muscle. One important but surprising fact is that individual muscle
fibers rarely run the entire length of the muscle. Muscles are actually composed
of a sequence of one-to four-inch (two-and-a-half- to ten-centimeter) segments
of muscle fiber linked together. For that reason, you can’t think of muscle fibers
as being synonymous with the actual muscle. This is critical, as the growth of
each muscle fiber depends on whether it is actually stimulated during a particular
exercise. In many cases, muscle fibers remain unused and just go along for the
ride during a lifting movement. Whether the fiber is used depends not only on
the amount of resistance but also on the angle of the exercise and the specific
range of motion used in the exercise. If the angle (such as in the flat bench press
versus incline bench press) and the range of motion (such as partial movements
versus full range of motion) do not call a specific muscle fiber into action, no
growth will occur in that fiber. To make sure you hit each muscle fiber and
stimulate it to grow, you have to use a variety of exercises. And even for a given
exercise, you must use variety. For example, on dumbbell bench presses, you can
adjust the angle of the bench from a 30-degree decline to a 45-degree incline in
as many increments as the benches will allow.

See table 6.33 for a sample small-angle training program. This program
capitalizes on minute changes in the angles used to work the major muscle
groups. Train each muscle group only once per week.
                             Barbell Blasting
The purpose of this training method is to limit all exercise choices to the barbell
and use a variety of barbell exercises to stimulate each muscle group from a
variety of angles. This serves as a good way to mix up your training for a short
while and get creative with the exercises you can perform with a barbell. It’s also
great if you train at home and do not own dumbbells.

One way to do barbell blasting is by performing all exercises in a power rack,
which will save time and provide safety, especially for those who train alone.
See table 6.34 for a sample barbell blast program that hits each major muscle
group using a three-day training split. This program can be done once or twice
per week. Regardless of the frequency, follow it for no more than three weeks
straight before switching to a program that offers more variety of exercises. You
can also use barbell blasting by throwing it into a workout here or there for some
sporadic variety or when the gym is crowded and not much else is available
besides a barbell and a power rack.
                           One-Sided Training
This method of training uses exercises that focus on just one side of the body.
This is known as unilateral training. Most training programs neglect unilateral
training; at best, some include a one-arm or one-leg exercise here or there, such
as the concentration curl or one-leg leg press. This can lead to imbalances in
muscle strength and development.

Research shows that you can produce more force on each side of the body when
you perform unilateral exercises than you could produce during bilateral
exercises, such as the barbell bench press. In addition, because there are
crossover effects from training a muscle on one side of the body, one-sided
training can encourage better muscle growth on the untrained side. That is, the
resting side also receives nervous stimulation from the increased blood flow that
is caused by exercising the muscles on the other side of the body. This enhances
the delivery of oxygen, nutrients, and hormones to the resting muscles while
helping to flush away waste products from the previous workouts. The result
may be better muscle regeneration and growth of the muscles.
Another benefit of one-sided training is that it trains the core muscles (the visible
and deep muscles of the abdomen and low back) that are important for a better
overall strength base. Perhaps the best point about one-sided training, however,
is the pure novelty of the stimulus that it places on the body. It stimulates the
nervous system and muscle fibers in a more unique way than any other training
programs. New stimuli may lead to gains in muscle mass and muscle strength.

One-sided training breaks up workouts into right-side and left-side training days.
In other words, muscles on the left side of the body (such as biceps and triceps)
are trained on one day, and the same muscles on the right side of the body are
trained on a different day. The program (shown in table 6.35) consists of four
workouts per week that train the entire body once. Workout 1 consists of the
right chest, shoulder, traps, triceps, back, and biceps. Workout 2 consists of the
left chest, shoulder, traps, triceps, back, and biceps. On workout 3 you would hit
the right quad, hams, glutes, and calves. Workout 4 closes out the body with the
left quad, hams, glutes, and calves. Abs can be trained at the end of the first and
fourth workout.

The volume of work performed per muscle group is fairly low (two exercises per
muscle group for two or three sets per exercise) because this type of training is
somewhat shocking on the nervous system. The weight used should be light
enough to allow for 10 to 12 reps per set. Follow the one-sided training for only
two to four weeks before switching back to normal bilateral training, and do not
revisit this alternative training style more than once every four to six months.

In addition to the exercises given in the sample workouts, there are many other
unilateral exercises you can perform for each muscle group. Table 6.36 contains
a list of options you can try.
                             Bookend Training
The workouts in Bookend training, found in table 6.37, are bookended by the
same exercise. Doing these exercises twice allows you to milk that exercise for
all the benefits it offers. And those benefits include increased size, strength, and
fat loss.

By doing these exercises at the beginning and end of the workout, you maximize
muscle growth and strength. That’s because you do the exercise first when you
are freshest and strongest, which maximizes your strength and the mechanical
overload you place on the muscles. When you do the exercise at the start of the
workout you will use heavy weights and lower reps (6-8 per set). This rep range
is best for building strength and mass due to the heavier load it places on the
muscles, which maximizes muscle damage, and therefore strength gains and
growth. When you damage muscle fibers, they are replaced with new ones that
grow bigger and stronger in an effort to adapt to the overload placed on them.
But that’s just one way that muscles grow. Using this rep range also better
stimulates the production of the anabolic hormone testosterone.

When you work that same exercise at the very end of the workout, you are
preexhausted by the exercises that preceded it. This maximizes the fatigue that
you place on the muscles, as does the rep range you will use at these points.
You’ll do three sets at the end of the workout. Set 1 uses the same weight that
you started with. This is to further enhance the muscle damage you started at the
beginning of the workout by forcing the muscles to move that weight when they
are already fatigued. You’ll be able to get only a few reps because of this, but
every one of these reps will push muscle damage that much further. You finish
with two sets of 12 to 15 reps. This higher rep range will take your muscles to
the limits of fatigue, not to mention the fact that you keep the rest between sets
in these three final sets to one minute to really fatigue the muscles. Fatigue is
also critical for muscle growth due to the biochemical waste products in the
muscle cells from the burning of glucose and fat for the energy needed for the
muscles to contract. This signals an increase in anabolic hormones and growth
factors like growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). The
anabolic factors, along with testosterone, influence muscle growth by enhancing
the growth of the new muscle fibers that will replace the damaged ones and by
enhancing muscle protein synthesis. Muscle protein synthesis works to build up
all of the muscle fibers by providing them with more protein. Since muscle
fibers are made of protein, more protein means bigger muscle fibers.
                      Push–Pull–Angle Training
The push–pull training split (covered in chapter 8) is one of the simplest and
most effective splits ever devised. Having been used by competitive
bodybuilders and other high-performance athletes, the concept involves
categorizing all weight-training exercises down to one of two types—pushing
movements and pulling movements—and splitting up workouts accordingly. A
typical push day includes exercises for the chest, shoulders, quads, and triceps
because these are considered the pushing muscles. And a typical pull day trains
the back, biceps, hamstrings, and traps. But weight training is not quite that
simple.

For most muscle groups, you can do at least a few exercises that don’t fall under
the strict definition of either a push exercise or a pull exercise. For example, leg
extension, leg curl, biceps curl, triceps extension, lateral raise, and fly are all
exercises that are technically neither pushing nor pulling movements. They are
actually what we would consider angular movements. That is, the movement
doesn’t follow a straight line but rather the path of an arc. These are always
isolation exercises because they involve only a single joint. Pushing or pulling a
weight in a straight line involves multiple joints working together. Thus, push
and pull exercises are always multijoint exercises.

The push–pull training split works well for powerlifters and strength athletes
who rarely do angular (isolation) exercises. But because bodybuilding relies
heavily on such movements, I created the push–pull training split into the push–
pull–angle split. In it, you’ll have one push day in which you hit chest, legs,
shoulders, triceps, and calves with multijoint exercises; one pull day in which
you hit back, traps, and biceps, again with multijoint moves, as well as abs; and
two angle days, which collectively hit all major muscle groups with isolation
exercises only.

One angle day trains the chest, legs, shoulders, and triceps, while the other trains
back, biceps, forearms, and abs. You’ll end up training each muscle group twice
per week, once with compound moves (push or pull) and again with isolation
moves (angle). This way, you can focus on one heavy basic training day for each
muscle group where you use lower reps, and one lighter isolation day where you
use higher reps, for a multifaceted approach to overall growth, muscle mass, and
strength. Not only is each muscle being trained more frequently, but each is
getting different types of stress (heavy and light) each week. Separating the types
of exercises into two workouts for each body part will be a welcome change for
your muscles, resulting in greater hypertrophy and strength gains.

Follow the four-day push–pull–angle training split as suggested in table 6.38 for
four weeks. Feel free to use it longer, but after four weeks on this sample
program be sure to make some changes, such as swapping out the exercises
listed in table 6.39 in the Push–Pull–Angle Exercises box for others listed as
follows. Also, feel free to alter rep ranges and rest periods, depending on your
training goals. The routine listed in table 6.38 is a combination of strength and
hypertrophy, using low- (4-7), moderate- (8-12), and high-rep schemes (15-20).
                 Push–Pull–Angle Exercises
Table 6.39 lists virtually every push, pull, and angle exercise for every
major body part. Use this catalog to substitute in other exercises to the
push–pull–angle sample four-day split.
                            Big Band Program
As discussed in chapter 4, resistance bands or strength bands offer a unique type
of resistance that is called linear variable resistance, which refers to a increasing
resistance progressively with the range of motion. Using the bench press as an
example, that means as you press the bar off your chest the resistance gets
progressively heavier the farther you press the bar to full arm extension. That
increase in resistance necessitates the application of more force toward the top of
the lift, which limits the slowing at the top of an exercise that normally occurs to
stop the weight.

Bands are also great to travel with because they weigh little yet provide ample
resistance. The Big Band program in table 6.40 is a good workout to do even if
you have a full weight setup because it will hit the muscles with this unique
resistance.
                             Machine Muscle
Sure, they don’t enhance the strength of your stabilizers, but resistance machines
do have several benefits:

 1. Ease and convenience makes them great to use when you’re short on time.
 2. Constant tension: With machines you never lose the stress (or tension) that
    the weight places on the muscle. (For example, compare the dumbbell fly to
    the fly machine. You don’t lose the stress on the muscle when your hands
    come together as happens on the dumbbell fly.)
 3. Failure: You can safely train to all-out muscle failure with or without a
    spotter and even forced reps on your own on some machines.

The all-machine workout in table 6.41 isn’t designed for you to follow for any
length of time. Try it for one or two weeks as a change of pace. You’ll give your
joints some rest from the heavy pounding you normally do with free weights and
stimulate some new muscle growth by focusing constant tension on your muscle
fibers. Or when you are crunched for time on chest day or arm day, choose the
workout for the muscle group you need to train in a hurry.

These workouts take advantage of the machine’s ease of changing weight by
using drop sets and allow for safety when training past failure, such as with
forced reps. Try these workouts and you’ll never think about machines as
beginner equipment again.

Keep rest periods between sets to a minimum (1-2 minutes).
        Programs That Manipulate Training
                   Frequency
The standard training method for making sound gains in muscle size is to allow a
minimum of 48 hours between training sessions for a particular muscle group.
This time period allows the processes of muscle recovery to kick in so that the
muscle damage inflicted in the previous workout can be repaired and the
depleted fuel stores can be replenished. However, on occasion, going against
conventional thinking on recovery can be an advantage for making muscle gains.
This can be done by training similar muscle groups on consecutive days or even
training them twice in one day. Increasing the frequency of training for short
periods can lead to more frequent muscle growth.

                        Back-to-Back Training
Back-to-back training refers to training a muscle group on two consecutive days.
It is also referred to in some bodybuilding circles as feeder workouts, because
the concept is to train the muscle group again the very next day but with very
light weight, higher reps, fewer sets, and very low intensity to help increase
blood flow to the muscle tissue. The theory is that this will supply the recovering
muscle cells with more nutrients such as amino acids and glucose (both critical
for muscle growth and strength), anabolic hormones such as GH and
testosterone, and more oxygen for faster recovery. It will also help remove the
waste products and cellular debris that were created from the previous workout.
It also leads to greater water flow from the blood supply into the muscle—this is
the cause of the pump—which is believed to turn on muscle-building pathways
because of the stretch that is placed on the muscle cell by the volume overload.
While no studies have looked at this effect on muscle growth directly, one study
found that the cortisol response on the second workout day is significantly lower
and the testosterone levels are slightly higher (Pullinen et al. 2002). Hormonal
responses to a resistance exercise performed under the influence of delayed-
onset muscle soreness. This means that a greater anabolic environment is created
within the muscles, which can enhance the potential for muscle growth and
strength gains.

The first back-to-back workout for each muscle group should be very intense.
Muscle failure should be reached on all sets and followed with forced reps or
drop sets. Volume should also be high (12 to 16 sets per muscle group) to ensure
the muscle is thoroughly fatigued. The second workout should be lower in both
intensity and volume. Perform only about six to eight sets per muscle group and
perform 15 to 20 reps, never reaching muscle failure. See table 6.42 for a sample
back-to-back workout program.
                         Twice-a-Day Training
Similar to back-to-back training, twice-a-day training works the same muscle
group back to back, just on the same day. The program is based on research that
shows that when muscles are trained twice in the same day, the amount of
muscle glycogen increases by nearly double the normal value. Since glycogen
pulls water into muscle cells, the muscle cells become fuller (more pumped).
This causes a stretch on the muscle cells that is believed to trigger muscle
growth.

Twice-a-day training also encourages capillary growth in muscle tissue and
increases the density of fuel-metabolizing mitochondria in the muscle cells, both
of which help the muscle to assimilate nutrients. It also works to boost resting
metabolism after the twice-a-day workouts, which can help to encourage fat loss
during cutting phases of training.

With twice-a-day training the same exercises should be done for both workouts.
This is because different exercises stress different muscle fibers, and it is
essential to stress the same muscle fibers in the second workout as were stressed
in the first. However, the order of these exercises is not critical. So some
bodybuilders begin the first workout with compound movement and then finish
with isolation exercises. In the second workout they reverse that order. This
helps to prevent boredom. Repetitions for both workouts should be high (in the
range of 12 to 20) to prevent overstressing the targeted muscle group and better
deplete muscle glycogen. Rest should be no more than 60 seconds between sets
to best deplete glycogen stores, increase caloric expenditure, and facilitate fat
loss.

Workouts should be separated by at least three but no more than eight hours of
rest. If there is not enough time between sessions, the testosterone response that
occurs from training may be blunted, and cortisol levels may increase too much.
Muscles should receive about three to seven days of recovery before you train
them again. Use the twice-a-day program for no more than six weeks, because
using it any longer may actually hinder progress. See table 6.43 for sample
twice-a-day workouts.
              Chapter 7
  Training Cycles for Building Muscle
                 Mass
Once you are familiar with the fundamentals of strength training, including the
basic guidelines on designing a training program for building muscle mass as
well as having an arsenal of advanced mass-training techniques, it’s time to
consider the long-term application of your training program. Being able to put
this acquired knowledge together in a long-term program is the only way of
reaching your desired goals. Whether you’re a beginner, intermediate, or
advanced weightlifter and just want to add general muscle mass to your frame,
or you want to shed body fat while adding muscle, or you have specific muscle
groups you want to focus on building up, this chapter has a program for you.


                   Mass-Building Programs
Although it is well established that certain exercise choices, orders of exercises,
volumes, resistances, and amounts of rest between sets are better than others for
developing muscle mass, sticking within those guidelines for too long can
actually hinder your progress. This is the foundation of periodization (covered in
chapter 3). For instance, although the repetition maximum continuum indicates
that using a range of 6 to 12 reps per set is best for muscle hypertrophy, sticking
within those confines will lead to stagnation in muscle growth. Therefore, while
some of your training should be done with this rep range, you also need to work
in both lower-and higher-rep ranges. The question, then, is how and when to do
this. This rationale also applies to the other acute variables of training. To ensure
that gains in muscle mass are optimized and persistent, smart bodybuilders
realize that the frequent cycling of their workouts is as essential to their progress
as the acute variables.

Developing a basic cycle that carries your training over the next 6 months or
year is much like an insurance policy that protects your progress. This template
will serve as a basic guide to steer you through your journey to gain more
muscle. If you are a beginner, you should follow this program as prescribed for
your first 6 months of serious training. The intermediate (6 to 12 months of
training experience) and advanced (over a year of consistent training experience)
weightlifters are provided a yearlong training guide. However, at this level you
can take a few side roads here or there as long as you mind the overall scheme of
the program. In the end, remember that everything works, but nothing works
forever.

Beginner Program (First Six Months)
This six-month program breaks down into six four-week segments (see table
7.1). In the first three segments, you follow a whole-body training split and train
with weights three days per week, working your entire body each time. The first
four weeks you will train one exercise per muscle group. The exercises are the
same for each workout and the reps are 15 per set with two-to three-minute rest
periods between sets. This helps to train the nervous system during this
introductory phase. The second four-week cycle adds a second exercise to each
muscle group to increase both volume and variety in the way the muscles are
trained. Exercises performed are the same for each workout and reps are 12 to 15
per set with two-to three-minute rest periods. The third four-week cycle changes
the exercises at each different workout for the week. This provides three
different exercises per muscle group at the end of the week in an effort to target
all the muscle fibers in each muscle group. For example, chest exercises include
flat bench press, incline dumbbell fly, and decline dumbbell press to hit muscle
fibers of the lower, middle, and upper pecs. The exercises per muscle group drop
back to just one per workout but increase in number of sets. Reps drop down to
10 to 12, while rest periods remain the same at two to three minutes between
sets.

In the last three segments, you’ll train with a two-day training split for a total of
four workouts per week. During the first four weeks exercises will be the same
for each muscle group on the two workouts that are done each week. Most major
muscle groups will be trained with three exercises for a total of six sets per
muscle group. The exceptions are legs, which will be trained with four exercises,
and the smaller muscle groups like biceps and triceps are trained with only two
exercises per workout. During the second four-week cycle, exercises drop back
to about two per major muscle group, but the sets increase to three per exercise.
Rest period during this entire phase drops down to one to two minutes between
sets. Each muscle group is trained with different exercises on the different
workout days. During the last four-week cycle the exercises increase to about
three for most major muscle groups, as do the sets for most (three per exercise).
After this phase is completed, you can graduate to the intermediate program.
Intermediate Program (Six Months to One Year)
If you are an intermediate lifter, you are at a unique level of weightlifting
experience. Because of neurological training, you have surpassed the rapid gains
in strength that beginners experience, yet you haven’t started to plateau in the
gains related to muscle fiber growth. You also have a fair amount of knowledge
of and enthusiasm for strength training. This is the stage where the particular
training program is not as critical for making continued gains as long as you
maintain a periodized plan.

If you are an intermediate lifter, you should follow a basic training program that
involves a three-day or four-day split, as discussed in chapter 5. Making frequent
changes in exercise selection provides the muscles with resistance from a variety
of angles to stress different individual muscle fibers within the targeted muscle.
However, the most critical change comes in the form of the resistance, or weight,
used and the number of reps performed per set.

The yearlong program found in table 7.2 outlines the rep ranges you should
follow throughout the year to graduate to advanced weightlifter status. Because
research shows that periodized programs that last a minimum of 8 weeks and a
maximum of 20 weeks are the most beneficial (Rhea and Alderman 2004), the
intermediate program follows a 20-week linear mass cycle, then an 8-week mass
microcycle, and finally a 20-week undulating-mass cycle (which assumes you
are using a four-day split). Each phase of the program allows one week of active
recovery (where other physical activity outside of weightlifting is encouraged)
before moving to the next phase, along with one week of active rest during the
undulating phase, for a 52-week program that will keep the muscle gains
coming. But feel free to skip these active rest weeks if you prefer to march
straight through.
If you are an intermediate and are interested in making gains in general mass,
you should follow the basic design guidelines in chapter 5 for making exercise
selections. Rest periods should be about two to three minutes between exercises,
but you should manipulate these on occasion. For example, when reps are in a
low phase (4 to 6), allow up to four minutes of rest between sets. When reps are
in a high phase (more than 12), limit rest to one minute between sets. For all
other rep ranges, keep the rest period between sets to two to three minutes.
Cycling the rest periods will further enhance gains in muscle mass.

If you are concerned with gaining muscle while losing body fat, you should limit
rest periods to one minute or less. Research suggests that keeping the rest
periods below one minute can enhance the number of calories burned during and
after a strength training workout, regardless of the rep range used (Falvo et al.
2005). It is also wise to use as many compound exercises as possible. These use
more muscle groups than isolation exercises and therefore help to burn more
calories. Of course, performing aerobic exercise in addition to strength training
is critical to losing body fat along with limiting caloric intake through proper
dieting. For more on maximizing fat burning while building muscle and gaining
strength, see part IV.

As an intermediate, if you want to use more advanced training techniques during
this program, you can find numerous methods in chapter 6 that you can throw in
where the rep ranges are appropriate. Several techniques found in the programs
that manipulate sets and exercise selection, and even a few in the rep
manipulation methods section, are not dependent on rep ranges and can be
dropped in where desired. For example, try slow-rep training during weeks 5 to
8, negative training during week 23, and barbell blasting during week 26; throw
in superset and forced-rep training where desired during weeks 31 to 51.

Advanced Program (More Than One Year)
If you are an advanced weightlifter, you are at the most difficult level of
weightlifting in which to encourage muscle growth. This is because you have
spent a long time training and therefore are closer to reaching your genetic
ceiling for muscle growth. Because of this, you must frequently train with
advanced training techniques that are high in intensity to help stimulate muscle
growth. The one-year advanced program in table 7.3 cycles advanced training
techniques found in chapter 6 with basic training splits to offer periods of lower
intensity in which the muscles can recover before the next advanced technique
starts. Feel free to replace any technique with one that better suits your needs at
the time. The same can be said about the training splits. Neither the specific
techniques nor the specific splits are critical to this yearlong program. What is
important is that you cycle four to six weeks of advanced technique training with
about four to six weeks of a basic training program that is lower in intensity.
                             Goal Tending
The long-term programs you just read about are a great start for anyone at any
level of experience, as long as the goal is to put on overall muscle size. However,
as weightlifters progress, their goals tend to be more specific. Maybe they want
to maximize both mass and strength, maybe they want to get lean and large, or
maybe they want to develop a specific muscle group. If you are an intermediate
or advanced weightlifter and are interested in specific goals, you should follow a
long-term program that manipulates the appropriate training variables to enable
you to reach those goals. This portion of the chapter has detailed program cycles
to match common goals shared by most bodybuilders. More than likely, any goal
regarding strength training for muscle mass will be listed here. Try one of the
following programs that meets your goals, or design your own personalized
program based on the knowledge you have acquired through reading this book.


Lean and Large
Chances are that if you are interested in bodybuilding or strength training for
muscle mass, you are also interested in building just lean muscle mass and not
adding body fat. Body fat blurs the shape and striations of well-developed
muscles.

Although a proper diet and plenty of aerobic exercise are tools to help you shed
body fat while gaining muscle, certain strength training programs are better than
others for getting lean. This Lean and Large program is composed of three four-
week phases that all emphasize compound movements (see table 7.4).
Compound exercises use the most muscle fibers and therefore burn the most
calories.
Training with heavy weight and low reps (4 to 6) keeps the metabolism highest
after the workout. Keeping reps high (12 to 20) burns the most calories during
the workout. Training heavy in addition to doing high reps has the greatest effect
on calorie burn. That’s why this program uses heavy weight for half the sets and
light weight for the final sets of most exercises. Rest between sets is also critical
for burning calories; shorter rest periods lead to greater calorie burn. This
program uses rest periods of 30 to 60 seconds between sets and a four-day
training split. However, you will be training six days a week to maximize your
caloric expenditure. This means you can repeat the four-day split (done on
consecutive days), with one rest day between workout 4 and workout 1, a total of
six times. For example, you will start with workout 1 on Monday, workout 2 on
Tuesday, workout 3 on Wednesday, and workout 4 on Thursday. You rest on
Friday and then continue the cycle with workout 1 on Saturday.

In phase 1, you train with 6 reps on the heavy sets and 12 reps on the light sets.
You do two heavy sets and two light sets for most exercises. Rest periods during
this first phase are 60 seconds between sets.

In phase 2, the reps on the heavy sets drop to 5 per set while reps on the light
sets increase to 15 per set. Lighter sets also increase to three per exercise to
increase volume and total calories burned during the workout. Rest periods
should drop to 30 seconds between sets to further enhance calorie burn during
and after the workout.

In phase 3, the reps on the heavy sets drop again to 4 per set, and reps on the
light sets increase to 20 per set. In this phase, heavy sets increase to three. Rest
periods should remain at 30 seconds between sets.

At the end of phase 3 you can continue the 12-week program if you feel you
have more body fat to lose. Take one week off from the gym with an active rest
period, in which you do other activities a minimum of six days per week. Then
simply start the program over at phase 1.

Big and Strong
For some weightlifters getting big is not the only goal. They are concerned with
developing strength and muscle mass at the same time—and with good reason.
Generally, as muscles increase in strength, they also increase in size. While there
isn’t a definite correlation between muscle strength and muscle size, it makes
sense that if you can lift more weight or perform more reps with a given amount
of weight, you will better stimulate muscle growth. This follows the principle of
overload.

The six-month Big and Strong program cycles two pyramid techniques—the
DeLorme ascending pyramid method (covered in chapter 9) and the Oxford
descending pyramid method (covered in chapter 6). (See table 7.5.) With the
DeLorme ascending pyramid technique your first set is done with about 50
percent of your 10-rep max (10RM) for a given exercise, but for just 10 reps. On
the second set, you increase the weight to about 75 percent of your 10RM for
that exercise and again stop at 10 reps. On the third set you increase the weight
to 100 percent of your 10RM for that exercise and complete as many reps as you
can until reaching failure. The repetition maximum is not critical, because many
powerlifters use this pyramid method with 3RM, 4RM, 5RM, and 6RM to train
for strength. In fact, during the second half of this program you will use a 6RM
during the DeLorme portion of the training. With the Oxford descending
pyramid technique, the first set is done with 100 percent of your 10RM to
failure. On the second and third sets you reduce the weight just enough to allow
you to complete about 10 reps. Again, the repetition maximum you use is not
critical because it is commonly used with 6RM, 8RM, 12RM, and 15RM. In the
second half of this program the reps increase to 12 per set. See table 7.5.
The DeLorme method tends to be better for deriving strength gains, while the
Oxford method is better for stimulating muscle growth (Fish et al. 2003). This
may be due to the amount of times you reach failure on each exercise. With the
DeLorme technique, failure is reached only once, whereas the Oxford technique
elicits failure on all three sets. Australian researchers have shown that training to
failure on just one set increases strength gains better than going to failure on
more than one set (Drinkwater et al. 2005). Muscle failure, however, seems to be
important for inducing muscle growth. The reason for this is that reaching
muscle failure better stimulates the release of growth hormone (GH) and insulin-
like growth factor-I (IGF-I). Both are anabolic hormones that stimulate muscles
to grow. That is why this program cycles both methods. In the end, you achieve
greater strength and muscle growth.

With the Big and Strong program you pyramid up in weight on all your exercises
during weeks 1 to 6 and again during weeks 13 to 18. The difference in these
two phases is the amount of weight you do on the last set of each exercise.
During weeks 1 to 6 you end with a weight you can do for 10 reps. During
weeks 13 to 18 you end with a weight that you can do for 6 reps. During these
parts of the program you will train each muscle group twice per week. That’s
because you will need less recovery time between workouts because you do
fewer total working sets per workout and train to failure on only one set per
exercise.

You can use the strength you gain during weeks 1 to 6 and 13 to 18 for lifting
heavier weights during weeks 7 to 12 and 19 to 24. Weeks 7 to 12 and 9 to 24
take you down the pyramid as you decrease the weight on each successive set for
all exercises. During these phases, you train each muscle group just once per
week because they will need the recovery since you will do more total working
sets per muscle group, plus you will train to failure on every set.

Shortcut to Size (Micromuscle) Program
One of my most popular training programs is the 12-week Shortcut to Size (a.k.a
Micromuscle) that is featured on bodybuilding.com and detailed in table 7.6.
More than a million people have completed the program, and many have gained
as much as 20 pounds (about 9 kilograms) of lean muscle. The strength gains
with this program are also phenomenal.

The Shortcut to Size program is based on linear periodization using microcycles,
as covered in chapter 3. In week 1 your rep range will be 12 to 15. In week 2 you
bump up all the weights and drop reps to 9 to 11. Week 3 adds weight again to
each exercise to drop the rep range to 6 to 8. And in week 4 you bump the
weight up again to drop reps to 3 to 5 per set. Those are the four microcycles that
you will repeat. On week 4 you have completed the first phase. On week 5 you
drop the weight back down and start all over at 12 to 15 reps per set. This is the
start of phase 2. But now you will be able to do each rep range with at least 5
and up to 20 pounds (a little less than 2.5 and as much as about 9 kilograms)
more than you could in phase 1. In week 6 (week 2 of phase 2), you will be back
at 9 to 11 reps per set. In week 7, or week 3 of phase 2, weight will go up again
to drop your reps down to 6 to 8 per set. And in week 8 (or week 4 of phase 2),
weight will increase for 3 to 5 reps per set. That completes phase 2. And in week
9 you start the final phase (phase 3) by dropping back down to 12 to 15 reps per
set and run through the four microcycles again until you are back down at 3 to 5
reps per set. Of course, in each phase you will be using 5 to 20 pounds more than
you did in phase 2 and 10 to 40 pounds (4.5 to 18 kilograms) more than you used
in phase 1. This is how you get stronger—much stronger—over this 12-week
program.

The constant increase in weight each week and the recycling of these four phases
lead to impressive gains in strength. The microcycles also lead to muscle
hypertrophy due to the constant changing of the rep ranges each week. Another
reason for the gains in strength and mass has to do with the fact that you keep
the weight steady on each exercise for all sets and you are forced to complete the
minimum number of reps in that rep range.

Greater gains in strength and muscle mass are guaranteed with this program. I
have seen some impressive results with this program. In men, I have seen gains
of strength over 90 pounds on the squat and over 50 pounds on the bench press.
And for muscle, many guys have gained over 20 pounds of muscle, as I
mentioned. Yes, pure muscle, while actually dropping body fat. Speaking of
body fat, when maximizing body fat with my training and diet tweaks, some
men have lost over 20 pounds of body fat. And women have also seen
impressive gains in strength and muscle while losing body fat. Women following
my program have increased their squat strength by over 60 pounds and bench
press strength by 30 pounds. And they have seen gains in muscle of over 10
pounds and fat loss over 10 pounds.

The first exercise you do for each muscle group (except for abs and calves) will
remain constant throughout all 12 weeks. This is the exercise where you focus
on increasing your strength. Most of the assistance exercises that follow the first
exercise will change in every phase. For abs, the exercises will change each
week based on the rep ranges. This is because some ab exercises are easier to do
for higher reps, while some are difficult to do for lower reps. So I organized the
best ab exercises for the prescribed rep ranges.

As already mentioned, this program works well for the three main goals that
everyone has: increasing muscle strength, boosting muscle size, and enhancing
fat loss. Yet, if you want to focus more on one of these three goals, you can also
do that and still get the other benefits.

Rest a good 3 minutes or even longer between sets. The key is performing as
many reps as possible within that prescribed rep range. More reps equal more
work performed each workout, and that equates to greater strength gains over
time. During weeks 1 and 2 of each phase of the program, you will do one rest-
pause set on the last set of each exercise. To do this, reach muscle failure on the
last set, then rack the weight and rest 15 seconds. Then continue the set until you
reach muscle failure again. During weeks 3 and 4 of all phases you will do a
drop set on the last set of each exercise. To do this, take the last set to muscle
failure and then immediately reduce the weight by 20-30%, and continue the set
until failure again.
Superman Training
This workout program uses supersets that pair opposing muscle actions. This is a
bit different from just pairing opposing (antagonist) muscles because the
exercise pairs are ones where the movements are the exact opposites. For
example, you will pair the bench press for chest with the barbell row for lats.
However, when you perform the lat pulldown for lats, you do not pair it with a
chest exercises. Rather, you pair shoulder press for the deltoids with pulldown
since these exercises better oppose each other’s movement pattern.

The first benefit of supersets done this way is greater strength and power.
Research shows that a muscle will contract with more strength and power if
preceded by contractions of its antagonist, or opposing muscle group. For
example, when you do a superset of barbell rows followed by the bench press,
you’ll be stronger on the bench press. In fact, Baker and Newton (2005) reported
that when trained athletes performed rows before doing the bench press throw,
they had significantly more power on the bench press throw than when they did
it without first doing the rows. University of Wisconsin at Parkside (Kenosha)
researchers (Ebben et al. 2011) found that when subjects did a six-second
isometric leg curl to fatigue the hamstrings before doing the vertical jump,
quadriceps force production increased by almost 15 percent compared to when
they did the vertical jump without first doing the leg curl. This phenomenon may
be due to greater inhibition of the antagonist muscles. Normally, the muscle
you’re working is somewhat limited by its antagonist muscle, much like a brake
on a car would limit how fast you can go if you kept it depressed. For example,
during the bench press, the strength of the pecs is somewhat limited by the
contraction of the back muscles. Doing a set of rows before benching, however,
lessens this inhibitory effect, allowing the pecs to contract with more force.
Robbins et al. (2010) reported that when participants did three supersets of rows
and bench presses using their four-rep max on each exercise, they were able to
perform more reps on sets 2 and 3 than when they did traditional sets. This may
also be due to the greater inhibition of the antagonist muscles, but it is also likely
due to getting a longer rest for each muscle group. When you are training the
opposing muscle group, the other muscle group is getting some rest. And when
you combine the rest taken between supersets, that equates to greater total rest
for each muscle group. For example, if you do three straight sets of the bench
press with one minute of rest between sets, you get one minute of rest between
each set of the bench press. If you do supersets of the barbell row and the bench
press and rested one minute between supersets, then you not only get the one
minute of rest between sets of the bench press, but you also get the time it took
to do rows as additional rest time between bench press sets. In some cases that
could double the amount of rest time between sets for each muscle group.
Regardless of the reason, being able to complete more reps with a given weight
will lead to greater muscle strength and growth over time.

A second benefit to antagonist superset training is that you will burn more body
fat. One study from Syracuse University (Kelleher et al. 2010) found that when
participants performed supersets for chest and back, biceps and triceps, and
quads and hamstrings, they burned 35 percent more calories during the workout
and 35 percent more calories after the workout than when they did straight sets.
The big news here is the greater calorie burn after the workout is over. After all,
a workout may only last one to two hours, so you can only burn so many extra
calories in that time. But burning 35 percent more calories after the workout is
over when you are sitting around the rest of the day is where that extra calorie
and fat burning can really add up. This is the same main reason why high-
intensity interval training (or HIIT) outperforms regular steady-state cardio to
help you drop fat so much quicker. Superset training allows you to burn more
calories and fat the rest of the day, which can make a serious dent on your body
fat stores.

A third benefit of doing supersets in this fashion is that you work muscle groups
that you’ve likely neglected. When was the last time that you focused on your
tibialis anterior muscle, or your lower traps? Probably never! This not only helps
you bring up these often-weaker muscle groups, but it also helps restore balance.
Not just balanced muscle development, but it helps to remove strength
imbalances that can hold your strength back and predispose you to injury.

A fourth benefit of this style of superset training is time management. You will
be able to complete far more sets of exercises in less time. You will complete
about 40 to 50 total sets of exercises in each workout. Yes, you read that right:
40 to 50 total sets! That would normally take well over two hours, maybe even
close to three hours, to complete so much work doing straight sets. Yet with the
Superman training program it will take you only about 60 to 90 minutes. This
will really ramp up the fat burning, not to mention muscle growth.

A fifth benefit of this type of training is change. One of my main mottos is
change is good. Change is critical in making continued progress to get bigger
and stronger. That’s why I offer so many training programs. So you can keep
changing up your training and keep growing bigger, stronger, leaner, and better.
Changing up your training in this manner is just what your body needs to finally
break through those plateaus that you’ve been stuck in. When was the last time
you did supersets for every muscle group for every workout? Not to mention
when was the last time you did supersets where every exercise was an exact
opposing motion of the other? Probably never! But I’m not just talking about the
change this type of superset provides. There is also the change in your training
split. With this program you will work the entire body in just two days. Then
there’s the change in your training frequency. If you’ve been following my
Shortcut to Size (Micromuscle) program, then you’ve been training each muscle
group just once per week (except for abs and calves). And most people train
each muscle group just once per week in other programs. In the Superman
program you will train each muscle group twice each week. The higher
frequency will help to stimulate new muscle growth and strength gains, not to
mention greater fat loss.

On top of all the change previously mentioned will be the change in the rep
ranges each week of this five-week program. The Superman program in table 7.7
uses an pendulum periodization scheme. Weeks 1 to 3 will be done in a linear
periodized scheme where each week the weight gets heavier and the reps get
fewer. You will start with 12 to 15 reps per set on most exercises in week 1.
Then you will move up in weight to limit you to 8 to 10 reps per set in week 2.
And then you bump up the weight again in week 3 to limit your muscles to
completing just 4 to 6 reps per set. And week 3 is also the starting point for the
next phase of the program because now you will reverse this rep pattern to
follow a reverse linear periodization scheme. You already did 4 to 6 reps per set
in week 3, so week 4 jumps back up to 8 to 10 reps per set. And then in week 5
you jump back up to where you started with 12 to 15 reps per set. But you will
find that you are suddenly much stronger in these rep ranges during weeks 4 and
5 as compared to weeks 1 and 2. That’s the magic of periodization.

You’ll probably like the bigger, stronger, and leaner you that the 5 weeks of this
program delivers. So if you want to continue with this superset plan, you can do
another round to extend the Superman training program into a 9-week program.
Superpumps
For bodybuilders the muscle pump is the ultimate goal of most workouts. The
pump is the rapid expansion in the size of muscles during a workout. The pump
simply refers to the filling up of muscle cells with water. When you work out,
you produce waste products in the muscle cells. These waste products are the
result of burning glucose and fat to fuel muscle contractions, and their build-up
inside muscle cells draws water (from the blood in the capillaries that feed the
muscle and the area surrounding the cells) into the muscle cells. As with a
balloon, the more water that the muscle cell can hold, the bigger the pump. The
pump essentially places a stretch on the muscle cell. This stretch not only makes
muscles momentarily bigger, but it also initiates biochemical pathways that
signal the muscle cell to grow.

Training with very high reps causes a greater flow of blood to the trained
muscles. It’s the muscle contraction that stimulates the blood to be directed in
that direction. During the superpump program, workouts focus on just one or
two muscle groups per session (see table 7.8). Each muscle group will be trained
just once a week with high reps and multiple sets. The workouts focus on
isolation exercises and cables for constant tension and employ techniques such
as preexhaust, supersets, compound sets, tri-sets, and drop sets. Keep rest to no
more than 90 seconds between sets or as specified for each training protocol.
Follow this program for no more than six weeks before switching to a program
that uses heavier weight and lower reps. After that, you can go back to the
superpump program for maximizing muscle pumps during the workout and
creating long-term muscle growth.
                             Muscle Focus
Many bodybuilders are concerned with the development of particular muscle
groups, such as biceps, chest, and shoulders. For some, this is due to an
imbalance in their overall muscle development—often caused by genetics or
improper training. For others, this is due to simple desire for having certain
muscle groups (often the biceps) as large as possible. If you have a particular
muscle group that you want to concentrate on developing, try one of the
following muscle-specific programs. There is a specific program for each major
muscle group. Each program is tried and true in application and results.


Big Chest Program
Big pecs are the signature body part of a serious bodybuilder. If your chest is a
weak spot on your physique, try following the big chest program shown in table
7.9. It is a 16-week program broken down into four separate phases that alter
exercise selection, training techniques used, weight and rep ranges, number of
sets, and even rest periods.
During this program you should alternate between a four-day and five-day
training split. During weeks 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, and 15 you will train chest twice
per week while training all other muscle groups just once. For this you will use a
four-day split that trains chest and abs on Monday and Friday; shoulders and
triceps on Tuesday; back, biceps, and abs on Wednesday; and legs and calves on
Thursday. During weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16 you train chest once per week
using a five-day split that works chest and abs on Monday; legs and calves on
Tuesday; shoulders and abs on Wednesday; back on Thursday; and biceps,
triceps, and abs on Friday.

Phase 1 is designed to build mass and strength; therefore, it involves mainly
compound exercises done for low reps. Phase 2 develops muscle size and
separation by increasing the number of isolation exercises and reps performed
per set. Phase 3 is designed to shape and define the muscle you built in the first
eight weeks by increasing the reps used again and incorporating compound sets.
Phase 4, the final phase, is a combination of the three prior phases. It uses only
heavy pressing exercises for two of the workouts during weeks 13 and 15, lighter
isolation for exercises for another two workouts during those weeks, and
compound sets with higher volume for the single chest workout during weeks 14
and 16.

Big Wheels Program
Big legs seem to be last on the wish list of many bodybuilders. The lower half of
the body seems to get neglected in an effort to focus on the more obvious muscle
groups of the upper body, such as the arms and chest. If you’ve been guilty of
neglecting your leg training, or if you are wise enough to realize that muscular
legs are just as important as a muscular upper body to produce a balanced
physique, try this big wheels program to pack on muscle to your quads and
hams.

The 16-week big wheels program (see table 7.10) is broken down into four 4-
week phases. Phase 1 kicks off with a high-intensity training (HIT) leg program
that uses heavy weight. As discussed in chapter 6, this training method uses
high-intensity methods and low volume. Precede each set with one short warm-
up set with approximately 50 percent of the weight you will use for the working
set. Take each working set to muscle failure. In addition, you should have a
spotter help you perform three or four forced reps after reaching muscle failure.
Resist the negative portion on every forced rep. Perform the HIT leg workout on
Monday and Friday (add abs following the Friday workout). Train chest, back,
and abs on Tuesday; train shoulders, biceps, and triceps on Wednesday. Take
Thursday off.
Phase 2 training drops the workouts back to one per week as the volume and
reps increase dramatically. It also uses supersets and preexhaust techniques to
keep the intensity high. This phase should be done as a five-day split, training
legs on Monday; chest and abs on Tuesday; shoulders and traps on Wednesday;
back on Thursday; and triceps, biceps, and calves on Friday. In addition to this
training in the gym, in phase 2 you kick-start the 50–50 method for dumbbell
squats (see chapter 6 for details). You will follow the 50–50 program through
phase 3 for a total of eight weeks. Use light dumbbells and perform one set of 50
reps of dumbbell squats in the morning and at night, every day.

Phase 3 drops the reps down to 10 to 12 per set, except on leg extensions where
you will do three sets of 21 (see chapter 6 for details). Leg training goes back to
twice per week as you’ll use the same split in weeks 1 to 4.

In phase 4 you are back to training legs once per week, but you split the
workouts into two per day, with quadriceps on Monday morning and hamstrings
and calves on Monday night. Because of this, the volume is very high, with
multiple exercises for each muscle group. Follow the same split as done in phase
2. The reps drop back to 8 to 10 per set for optimal muscle gains.

Calves to Cows Program
Calves seem to be the one muscle group of the lower body that few bodybuilders
have developed to their satisfaction, and it’s also the one muscle group that so
many want to develop. Unfortunately, if you aren’t genetically predisposed to
building big calves, you will have to work extremely hard for every ounce of
muscle you can add to them. The calves to cows program (see table 7.11) is for
those bodybuilders who need to work their calves hard and diligently. This
program is divided into four 4-week phases that change up the rep range and
weight used, the volume, and the training frequency in a specific pattern. Each
phase reduces the frequency at which you train the calves as well as the rep
range, but it increases the volume (number of sets and exercises performed) and
weight used.
Phase 1 starts off with training the calves five days a week. Use a basic five-day
training split during this phase and train calves at the end of every workout. Reps
are extremely high but volume is fairly low. Phase 2 increases the exercise
number and the sets performed to four per exercise, but it drops the training
frequency back to four days per week. You can use a four-or five-day training
split during this phase. Reps decrease to about 15 to 20 per set. In phase 3, the
frequency decreases to three times per week, but an extra calf exercise is added
and compound-set training is used. Reps drop down to 12 to 15 per set. You can
use a three-, four-, or five-day basic training split during this period of calf
training. The final phase, phase 4, trains calves only twice per week. Sounds
simple, but it increases the number of exercises performed and includes drop sets
on the last set of every exercise. After you reach failure on the last set, drop the
weight about 30 percent and repeat that twice. You can do this phase with any
type of split.

Six Weeks to Sick Arms
Regardless of where you’re starting from, this six-week program will put
noticeable size on your arms. You might expect to add an inch or more to the
arms. This six-week program is a progression that ramps up the training
frequency (how often you train arms each week) starting at once per week in
week 1, twice per week in week 2, and three times per week in weeks 3 through
5, and then backing way off in the final week 6 to just once per week again.
There is a method to this madness.

Week one will annihilate your biceps and triceps. You’ll pull out all the stops,
using negative-rep training to destroy every single muscle fiber in the arms.
You’ll need a good week to recover from this. The next week gets involves light
weight and high reps. Volume will be low on these workouts because you’ll still
be recovering from the previous week. These workouts will help you to recover
from the previous week and will get you ready for the crazy three weeks that are
to come. In weeks 3, 4, and 5 you will be hitting arms three times per week. If
you think that sounds like overtraining, you're right. But overtraining does not
happen immediately. It takes several weeks to actually become overtrained. The
technical term for training that can lead to overtraining is overreaching. And
what's interesting about overreaching is that research shows that if your diet is
adequate in calories, protein, and carbohydrate, as well as the right supplements,
then you can actually capitalize on overreaching and turn it into a way to get
bigger and stronger. But don't worry. I've got you covered on a diet and
supplement plan to ensure that you turn the training into distinct gains. Several
studies from the University of Connecticut (Ratamess et al. 2003; Kraemer et al.
2006) have shown that when participants overreach for several weeks, during the
two weeks following, they grow significantly bigger and stronger while taking it
easy. The key is to stop the overreaching just before it turns into overtraining.
That’s why you’ll be training arms three times per week in weeks 3 through 5
and then switch it up to just once per week in week 6. I also suggest that the
week after week 6 you take it fairly easy on your arms and train them just once
that week before getting back into any serious training programs.

Not only will the three-day-a-week arm training shock your muscles into
growing with frequent and intense workouts that cause overreaching, but it also
takes advantage of the staircase effect for building muscle. This refers to the fact
that training activates genes in muscle fibers that are responsible for many of the
adaptations that take place, such as muscle growth and increased strength. For
example, consistent training activates certain genes that result in building more
muscle fiber protein, which means more size and strength. These genes are
typically activated a few hours, and some remain activated for days. Repeated
workouts, if timed appropriately, can build on the activation of the genes to reach
an even higher activity level and thus greater muscle growth. This is referred to
as the staircase effect. In other words, let’s say a certain gene involved in muscle
growth is activated by a workout to the point that that its activity is boosted by
100 percent after the workout, then slowly declines in activity over the next few
days so that the day after the workout it is still up by 75 percent, and the second
day after the workout it is up by 50 percent, then the third day it is up by just 25
percent, and finally on the fourth day after the workout it is back to the original
level. If you performed the workout on the fourth day after the first workout or
later, then that gene would be bumped back to 100 percent of its original activity.
However, if you worked out on the second day after the first workout, when the
gene was still up by 50 percent, then you could potentially bump up its activity
to 150 percent. This could lead to even greater muscle growth and strength gains
than if you waited to train again after the fourth day or later, such as one week
later. This is one reason training a muscle group every 48 hours could lead to
even greater muscle growth and strength gains than training every seven days.

Of course, this program is not all about training frequency. While moving to
more frequent workouts can help you to build extra size on your arms, to really
get them up there in size will require pulling out all the stops. So intensity
techniques, like drop sets, forced reps, rest, negative reps, and supersets, will be
key in forcing them to grow. These techniques not only put more stress on the
muscle, but they are also known to boost growth hormone levels. In fact, one
study from Finland (Ahtianen et al. 2003) reported that participants doing forced
reps increased GH levels three times higher than when they just stopped after
reaching muscle failure. That extra growth hormone will be put to good use
initiating muscle recovery and growth. Yarrow et al. (2007) reported that using
negative-rep training leads to high GH levels. Another key element to this
program is the constant switching up of weight and rep ranges every workout
(undulating periodization) to keep your arms growing.

Because you’ll be training arms pretty much every other day during weeks 3, 4,
and 5, you may be worried about your arms still being sore when you train them.
Don’t be. Nosaka and Newton (2002) showed that when participants work out
intensely to cause muscle pain and train that muscle again just two days later and
again four days later when the muscle is still sore, it does not impede recovery.
Plus this can actually help muscles grow. Pullinen et al. (2002) found that when
participants trained the same muscle group just two days, the catabolic hormone
cortisol was lower. Since cortisol competes with testosterone, having lower
cortisol levels during and after workouts can make you more anabolic and allow
your testosterone to better enhance muscle growth.

To properly hit your arms during these six weeks, you’ll need to alternate your
training split. Each week you will follow a four-day training split. However,
based on the week and number of times you are training arms, you will be
training on four days of the week and pairing up different muscle groups each
week. Use the training splits in table 7.12 for each week of the Six Weeks to
Sick Arms program (see table 7.13).
Wider Is Better Back Program
Having a wide back makes you look impressive from both the front and back.
It’s also an important area to develop for strength in all other exercises. This 16-
week program can help you build up a weak back (see table 7.14). Phase 1 uses
pull-ups as a warm-up and deadlifts, rows, and good mornings to build a strong
back. Reps are low to encourage strength gains, and the volume is low because
you do this workout twice a week during this phase on Monday and Friday along
with abs. Do chest, shoulders, and calves on Tuesday; biceps, triceps, and abs on
Wednesday; and legs on Thursday. Phase 2 increases the volume and decreases
the frequency to once per week. Train chest, shoulders, and abs on Monday. The
compound sets add another level of challenge, which means the back muscles
will need a full week of recovery during this phase. Phase 3 is done twice per
week with the same training split that is used in phase 1. The Monday and Friday
workouts are different. The Monday workout focuses on rowing exercises done
with heavier weight and low reps. The Friday workout, on the other hand,
focuses on pull-ups and pulldowns with lighter weight and higher reps. This
workout should be one giant set cycled through twice. Phase 4 is a cable-ready
program that hits the lats from a variety of angles with all cable moves. This
keeps maximal tension on the muscles throughout the full range of motion. Reps
are higher, and you should do drop sets on the last set of each cable exercise. Do
this workout once per week with a split similar to the one used in phase 2. At the
end of phase 4 you can switch to a more basic back workout using the split you
typically train with.
Cannonball Delts Program
As with the back, having big, round, muscular shoulders can make your
physique appear larger from every angle. Since the deltoid muscle is composed
of three heads, a well-balanced shoulder program should target all three heads.
The cannonball delts program (see table 7.15) drives growth in all three heads in
order to build deltoids that are massive and balanced. Phase 1 starts with a basic
strength and mass program done twice per week on Monday and Friday along
with traps and abs. The Monday workout is a barbell blasting workout and the
Friday workout is done with all dumbbells. Train legs and calves on Tuesday;
chest, triceps, and abs on Wednesday; and back and biceps on Thursday. Both
are done with low reps and low volume. Phase 2 drops the frequency back to
once per week as the intensity is ratcheted up with high-rep, high-volume
training that uses the preexhaust technique. Train chest, triceps, and abs on
Monday; shoulders and traps on Wednesday; legs on Thursday; and back, biceps,
and abs on Friday. Phase 3 splits the training up into one pressing workout on
Monday and one raise workout done as a tri-set on Friday. Do this with the same
training split used in phase 1. Phase 4 finishes off the delts with a once-a-week
microcycle that blasts the delts with increasing reps each week and plenty of
drop sets on the last set of each exercise.
                  Part III
       Training for Maximal Strength




Training for maximal strength is much different from training for muscle mass.
From a training standpoint, the total volume and reps performed per set tend to
be lower when training for strength compared to the volume and number of reps
when training for muscle mass. From a physiological standpoint, muscle growth
tends to be more about the aftereffects of training, while muscle strength also has
a learning component that develops during the actual workouts. Even though
mechanical stress and metabolic stress are important factors for developing
muscle strength, there is a large component to strength development that relies
on training of the nervous system.

Motor nerves that run from the spinal cord to the muscle fibers are responsible
for initiating muscle contractions. Strength training increases muscle strength
through several adaptations of the motor nerves. One mechanism involves
training the motor nerves to fire at a faster rate. This allows the muscle fibers to
contract with more force (that is, greater strength). Strength training also trains
the motor nerves to fire at this faster rate for a longer period without fatiguing,
This allows more reps to be done with a certain amount of weight. Another
mechanism that leads to enhanced strength is synchronization of motor nerves.
This refers to the ability of motor nerves that control various muscle fibers
within the same muscle to fire at the precise time to allow for the greatest
production of muscle force.

What is similar between training programs for maximizing muscle strength and
programs for maximizing muscle growth is that both trial and error in the gym
and research in the laboratory have defined the training techniques and programs
that work best at encouraging strength gains. Part III will teach you how to train
for maximal strength. Chapter 8 covers basic workouts for building strength.
This chapter starts with a lesson on weekly training splits that are optimal for
building strength regardless of your training schedule. From there it progresses
to general guidelines for training to maximize strength gains. Finally, it covers
training tips and strategies for maximizing muscle strength on the three major
strength lifts (bench press, squat, deadlift) as well as rules for training the core.

Chapter 9 introduces you to advanced training techniques that will have you
lifting more weight in no time. These techniques work to increase mechanical
and metabolic stress as well as enhance the firing rate and synchronicity of
motor nerves.

Chapter 10 provides long-term periodized training cycles that will help you
continually improve your strength without plateauing. It starts by teaching you
how to test your maximal strength, a critical component for assessing your
progress over the course of any strength training cycle. From there, you can pick
a training cycle that best fits your training experience and follow the sequencing
cycles. Or you can follow a cycle that is specific to the exercise in which you
want to boost strength. Regardless of your training experience or specific
strength goals, this section covers everything you need to know to realize your
strength potential.
                  Chapter 8
      Tactics for Maximizing Strength
The first step toward getting stronger is learning how to develop workouts and
basic training programs with that goal in mind. The variables you will need to
consider for developing strength training workouts, as discussed in chapter 2, are
the choice of exercises you will perform, the order of those exercises, how many
sets of each exercise you will do, how heavy a weight you will use on those
exercises, and how much rest you will allow between sets. Furthermore, you will
also need to consider how often to train each muscle group and what type of
training split you will employ.

This chapter focuses on the common training splits used by lifters interested in
maximizing muscle strength. This will help you determine the best weekly
schedule to follow for increasing muscle strength. From there the chapter steps
back to focus on the variables of each workout. Then it steps back again to focus
on the details of the specific exercises. Each step gives you more detail regarding
guidelines, techniques, and tips for maximizing your muscle strength.


                             Weekly Splits
Regardless of whether your goal is to develop strength or muscle mass, the
easiest way to split up your training is to work within the confines of the week.
Although the body doesn’t specifically follow a seven-day cycle, for practical
purposes, a seven-day strength training cycle makes sense with most people’s
schedules. The following splits for developing strength all follow a seven-day
cycle and will fit anyone’s schedule and level of strength training experience.

One common denominator of these splits is that they focus on training three
major strength lifts—the bench press (the marker for upper-body strength),
squats (the marker for lower-body strength), and deadlifts (the marker for overall
body strength). These also are the three lifts that are involved in powerlifting
competition. Typically, the resistance used on these three exercises is expressed
as a percentage of the weightlifter’s one-repetition max (1RM), while all other
exercises are expressed as an RM target zone—the resistance that limits a lifter
to a specific number of repetitions. This is because powerlifters and others
interested in training for strength frequently test their 1RM on the three major
exercises.

Because training for maximal strength typically involves training with the three
major strength exercises, as opposed to training a multitude of muscle groups,
there tend to be fewer commonly used training splits. This does not mean that
there are a limited number of ways to split up a strength training program. The
following training splits are those that are well accepted by the majority of
strength experts and athletes.

Whole-Body Strength Training
Whole-body strength training refers to single workouts that stress most major
muscle groups of the body. This training split allows for most major muscle
groups to be trained three times per week—usually Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday. Many experts believe that frequency of training is important for gaining
strength. In fact, many strength coaches have their athletes follow a whole-body
training system. Not only do they think the frequency of training is important,
but most also believe that because the body works as a whole unit, it should be
trained accordingly. Therefore, a whole-body strength training split can be an
effective means of increasing overall strength.

The frequency offered by whole-body strength training is also beneficial for
beginners. As discussed in chapter 5, this is because the initial adaptations made
in a strength training program involve the training of the nervous system. The
best way for beginners to train to build strength is to use slightly higher
repetitions than trained lifters use and more frequent training of the same
exercises to program their nervous systems.

The workouts on a whole-body split typically include one exercise per major
muscle group. The exercise choices usually include the bench press, squat, and
deadlift, or similar exercises that mimic those particular exercises, as well as
assistance exercises that help with increasing strength on these particular
exercises. Most weightlifters who use a whole-body split do not train small
muscle groups (such as traps, forearms, and calves) in order to better concentrate
on the muscles that are directly involved in the bench press, squat, and deadlift.
When you are following a whole-body training split, the first exercise of the
workout should alternate between the bench press, squat, and deadlift. That way,
each major strength exercise is trained once per week when the body is fresh.
Some powerlifters also include one extra assistance exercise for the exercise
they are focusing on in that workout. For example, in table 8.1, on Monday, leg
press is done in addition to the squat.
Push–Pull Training Split
This split divides the workouts into pushing exercises and pulling exercises.
Pushing exercises include any exercise in which the positive (concentric) portion
of the exercise involves pushing or pressing the weight away from the body
(such as in the bench press and shoulder press) or pushing the body away from
the floor or platform (such as in the squat). Pull exercises include any exercise in
which the positive (concentric) action involves pulling the weight toward the
body (such as in the biceps curl, barbell row, or leg curl) or pulling the body
toward a fixed object (such as in the pull-up).

The reason that some weightlifters split their workouts into push-and-pull
workouts is that those exercises involve similar muscle groups working together
to perform the exercise. For example, the pectoralis, deltoid, and triceps muscles
are all used to varying degrees during the bench press and the shoulder press.

Push-and-pull training allows for each workout to be done twice a week for a
total of four workouts per week, as shown in table 8.2. On push day, it is wise to
alternate between the bench press and the squat as the starting exercise.
Upper-and Lower-Body Powerlifting Split
This split divides workouts into an upper-body workout day and a lower-body
workout day. The upper-body exercises involve all exercises for major muscle
groups of the upper body. The lower-body exercises involve all exercises for the
major muscle groups of the lower body.

Like push–pull training, upper-and lower-body training allows each workout to
be done twice per week for a total of four workouts per week (see table 8.3).
Most powerlifters who follow this type of split use the two upper-body workouts
to emphasize bench press training. In addition, they may use one workout to
emphasize the pushing assistance muscles (such as shoulders and triceps), while
the other upper-body workout focuses on the pulling assistance muscles (such as
back and biceps). For lower-body workouts, most powerlifters split the two
workouts into a squat emphasis and quadriceps assistance exercise workout and
a deadlift emphasis and hamstring assistance exercise workout.
Max Effort–Dynamic Effort Training Split
This training split is basically a modified version of the upper-and lower-body
powerlifting split. Each split trains the entire body in two days, which allows for
four workouts per week. The major difference that separates max effort–dynamic
effort from upper-and lower-body training split is the specific amount of
resistance used during the max effort–dynamic effort split. For details of the max
effort–dynamic effort method, see chapter 9.

With the max effort–dynamic effort training split, the first two workouts of the
week are done using the max effort system (see table 8.4). This calls for a
gradual buildup of weight on each successive set of the bench press, squat, or
deadlift until you reach 90 to 95 percent of 1RM. Some lifters go to 100 percent
on some workouts.
During the last two workouts of the week, the weight used on the bench press,
squat, and deadlift is only 50 to 60 percent of the 1RM. Although most people
can lift this amount of weight for about 20 reps, these sets stop at 3 to 5 reps.
The key is in the rep speed at which they are performed. During the dynamic
effort workouts, these reps are performed as fast as possible.

Squat–Bench Press–Deadlift Training Split
Some weightlifters split their training into three workouts per week: one squat-
focused workout, one bench press-focused workout, and one deadlift-focused
workout. This way each major lift gets an equal amount of training time focused
on it. Usually the squat workout is performed first in the week to allow ample
time for recovery before the deadlift workout, which also uses the leg muscles to
a great extent. The squat workout is usually accompanied by assistance exercises
that train the quadriceps, hamstrings, and sometimes the calf muscles. The
second workout (performed no sooner than 48 hours after the squat workout) is
typically the bench press workout. This workout usually involves assistance
pressing exercises that target the chest, shoulders, and triceps muscles. The third
workout (performed no sooner than 48 hours after the bench press workout) is
the deadlift workout. In addition to the deadlift, this workout often includes
assistance pulling exercises that train the back and biceps muscles. See table 8.5
for a sample squat–bench press–deadlift training split.
               Changing Your Strength Split

The strength training splits covered in the previous section have little
differences among them. All focus on training the three major strength
lifts; a secondary focus is on training the assistance exercises for these
three strength lifts. Because of this, changing the strength training split
   every few months is one way to institute another form of variation in the
   training program. However, most competitive powerlifters have one
   training split that they stick with year round. Therefore, if you find a
   certain training split that works better for your schedule, you can
   potentially use it endlessly.



            Essentials of Strength Programs
The type of training split you decide to follow is not as critical a factor for
successful strength gains as the proper choice of exercises, exercise order,
resistance, and volume. Regardless of the split you employ for developing
strength, there are certain rules of success to follow. Follow these general rules
to ensure that your training is optimal for strength gains. In addition, the three
major strength lifts are covered in detail. That’s because you can’t properly
increase your strength on these lifts without being proficient in the proper
technique for each. Last but not least, the chapter covers core training. You must
have a strong core to transfer strength to the limbs. Once you have these
fundamentals of strength training, you will be ready to advance to the techniques
for boosting strength (chapter 9).

General Rules of Strength Training
Training for muscle mass uses exercises as a means to an end. Training for
maximal strength, on the other hand, does not use exercises merely as tools.
Instead, training for strength is about increasing performance on the exercises.
For most weightlifters, the exercises they train are the bench press, squat, and
deadlift. Therefore, the first and most obvious rule is that you should include
these three exercises in your program. You should also include assistance
exercises to help you boost strength on the bench press, squat, and deadlift.
These choices involve multijoint compound exercises, where appropriate.

Order of exercises is important as well—the bench press, squat, and deadlift
should each be performed first in the workout at least once per week. Following
the major lift should be the assistance exercises. The second exercise should be a
compound exercise that targets the major muscle group used in each of the three
exercises. The third exercise and any others that follow should be those that
target muscle groups that assist the major strength exercise.

The amount of resistance used is of paramount importance to your strength
gains. For the three major strength exercises, the resistance used is typically
expressed as a percent of the 1RM. This is convenient because the 1RM for
these lifts is frequently tested by those who are interested in increasing their
maximal strength. For strength gains, the majority of training time should be
spent using a load between 85 and 95 percent of the 1RM. Of course, cycling the
training load is wise for making continued gains in strength. In fact, loads as
light as 50 percent RM are often used by weightlifters to increase power, which
helps to boost strength. The resistance for the assistance exercises is usually
expressed as a specific repetition maximum (RM). These will often correspond
with the percent RM. For example, if the squat is being trained with 85 percent
of the RM, the leg press should be performed using a rep range of about four to
six. Regardless of the exercise, muscle failure should be reached only on one set
per exercise at the maximum. Many powerlifters rarely, if ever, train to muscle
failure. However, research from Australia suggests that training to muscle failure
on one set per exercise and no more is better for strength gains than not training
to failure or training to failure two or more times per exercise (Drinkwater et al.
2005).

Volume per workout is generally low when training for strength. For the major
strength exercises, typically as few as three to as many as eight sets are done per
exercise. For assistance exercises, usually three or four sets are performed per
exercise. For an entire workout, total volume can be as low as 12 to as high as 30
sets or more, depending on the split being used and the training phase.

When it comes to training rules, nowhere are they more critical than when
training for maximal strength. Research and years of experience support a
narrow spectrum of exercise choices, exercise order, resistance, volume, and
even rest periods that are effective in the quest for strength. Yet, as the saying
goes, rules are meant to be broken. As important as it is to follow rules for
strength training, breaking from the norm from time to time can be an effective
means of improving strength. This is especially true during plateaus, when
standard training practices fail to work. The training strategies in chapter 9 will
challenge the tried-and-true rules that most strength athletes have adopted as
standard training guidelines. Knowing how and when to use them will make a
world of difference in the strength gains you can expect from your training
program.
Bench Press Training
To many people, strength is all about the bench press. Rarely does a heavily
muscled athlete field the question “How much can you squat?” The question
everyone wants to know is “How much can you bench-press?” Of course,
masculinity is often associated with strong and well-developed upper-body
musculature, and the bench press is the marker for this strength. The bench press
develops the major muscles of the upper body—chest, shoulders, triceps, and
even the back to some extent.

Another reason so many people associate strength solely with the bench press
may be the fact that of the three major strength exercises, the bench press is the
easiest to perform. Almost anyone can walk into a gym and bench-press with
relative ease and safety. Whatever the reason, the bench press is the preeminent
strength exercise.

When it comes to training strategies for boosting strength in the bench press,
regardless of the training split being used, exercise choice and order are critical
factors. Of course, strength in the bench press cannot be optimally enhanced
without actually performing the bench press regularly. This is known as the
specificity principle. On bench press training days, you should perform the
bench press first while the muscle fibers are fully recovered from any previous
exercise. This ensures that the muscles can handle the maximal load they are
capable of for the specific number of reps prescribed for that workout.

After the bench press, you should do one other chest-pressing assistance
exercise, such as the incline or decline barbell press or dumbbell press (flat,
incline, or decline). On occasion, you can do chest isolation exercises instead.
However, isolation exercises are rarely used unless the weightlifter is in the
hypertrophy phase of training. This is because the isolation exercises do not
mimic the pressing motion of the bench press. Chest exercises are usually
followed with one shoulder exercise and one triceps exercise. These are
preferentially compound exercises, such as shoulder press or upright row for
shoulders and dips or close-grip bench press for triceps. On occasion these can
be isolation exercises. Depending on the split used, one back and one biceps
exercise may conclude the bench press workout, or you may train these on
separate pull exercise days. See table 8.6 for a sample bench press workout.
Sets performed on the bench press should typically fall in the range of three to
five, not including warm-up sets. All assistance exercises are usually limited to
three sets per exercise. The weight used on the bench press should start off light
(10 to 50 percent RM) and gradually work up to the heavy sets in the range of 85
to 95 percent RM. This is the range that most workouts are performed in,
depending on the training phase. Weight may go as high as 100 percent RM to as
low as 50 percent RM for some working sets during specific training phases of
the cycle. For the assistance exercises, reps typically correspond with the percent
RM being used in that workout on the bench press. So reps tend to fall mostly in
the range of 2 to 10 reps for assistance exercises, depending on the training
phase.
Rest periods between sets should be longer than when training for muscle size.
The exact time is not as critical as the fact that the body is mostly recovered
from the previous set. When training for strength, fatigue is not as critical as it is
for building muscle size. Therefore, resting anywhere from two to five minutes
is common practice. A detailed description of the proper exercise technique for
the bench press exercise can be found in the Big Bench Tips box and in chapter
14. Technique is a critical factor when training for strength. The program you
follow will not matter much to your strength gains if you do not perfect your
technique in the bench press.




                               Big Bench Tips

    Use these tips to help you lift more on the bench press:

    Setup

    Lie on a bench-press bench with your feet flat on the ground wider than
    shoulder-width apart. This helps to stabilize your body. Your knees
    should be bent at about a 90-degree angle.

    Maintain a slight arch in your lower back throughout the exercise and
    keep your shoulders and glutes pressed into the bench. Keep your glute
    muscles tightly contracted during the entire exercise.

    Grip

    Take a grip that is slightly wider than shoulder width on the bar. To
    determine the best grip for your arm length, make sure that when the bar
    reaches your chest there is a 90-degree angle at the shoulder and the
    elbow.

    Be sure to wrap your thumb around the bar. Make sure you squeeze the
    bar as hard as possible. This creates a solid connection to the bar by
    allowing the force developed by the chest, shoulder, and triceps muscles
    to be more effectively transmitted to the bar.
Lowering the Bar

Lift the bar off the rack to the point where it is over your upper chest.
This is your starting position.

Squeeze your scapulae together while lowering the bar. This stabilizes
the shoulder girdle and will help you recruit the lats to push the weight
up.

Lower the bar slowly. This allows the stored energy from the descent and
the elastic properties of the muscles to produce more force on the lift.




Arms

Your upper arms should form a 45-to 60-degree angle with your torso as
you lower and press the weight back up.
Touchdown

When the bar reaches your chest, it should touch across the nipples, not
much lower.

Pressing the Bar

Before you push the weight back up, dig your shoulders into the bench
and keep your butt on the bench. This stabilizes your shoulder capsule
and keeps the bar moving upward in a straight line.

You need to explode the weight off your chest as quickly and powerfully
as possible. Think about blasting the bar off your chest as if it weighed
just 10 pounds, even though, in reality, the bar will move quite slowly.
The neural drive that results from attempting to move the bar as quickly
as possible will recruit more high-threshold muscle fibers.

Press the bar straight up or back slightly toward your head. As you press
the bar up, try to rip the bar apart by pulling your arms outward without
changing your grip on the bar.

Legs

Although the bench press is an upper-body exercise, don’t forget to use
your legs. When you press the weight with your arms, you should also
drive the weight with your legs to transfer more force to your upper
body.

Breathing

Take a big breath in and hold it as you lower the weight and start it on its
return. This causes an increase in pressure in your chest and abdominal
cavity, which better supports your body and allows your muscles to
produce more force. It also expands the chest, shortening the distance the
bar has to travel.

Exhale after passing the most difficult stage of the lift or after you reach
the top position.
Squat Training
The squat is the exercise that defines lower-body strength. Although it’s
categorized as a leg exercise, the squat technically functions as a whole-body
strength and mass builder. It has been estimated that more than 200 muscles are
involved in executing the squat. In addition, the surge in growth hormone and
testosterone that accompanies the squat as compared to other exercises means it
enhances the strength and growth of all muscles. Many great bench pressers
espouse the importance of doing squats, if for nothing more than enhancing
bench press strength.

To increase squat strength, the first critical component of any training program is
the exercise choices and order. Simply stated, you have to actually squat to
increase squat strength. On workouts that emphasize squat training, the squat
should be the first exercise performed. When you’re training for strength, the
amount of weight you use is a critical factor for strength gains. Therefore, you
should do the squat first, when the muscles are not fatigued and are at their
strongest.

You should follow the squat with one assistance squat or leg press exercise (such
as the leg press or squat machine) and occasionally an isolation exercise for
quadriceps (such as the leg extension). In addition, many weightlifters also
perform one or two calf exercises at the end of their squat workouts. This is
sensible, since the calf muscles are involved during the squat.

Total sets performed for squats during squat workouts should be about three to
five, not including warm-up sets. All assistance exercises are usually limited to
three sets per exercise. Weight for the squat exercise should progressively
increase from light warm-up sets with weight around 10 to 50 percent RM to
heavy working sets of 85 to 95 percent RM. This is the range that most squat
workouts are performed in, depending on the training phase the lifter is in. On
the upper end, the weight used for training may go as high as 100 percent RM
for squats. On the low end, the weight used may be reduced to 30 percent RM or
less for working sets, such as during training phases that increase power. For the
assistance exercises, reps typically correspond with the percent RM used in that
workout on the bench press. So reps tend to fall mostly in the range of 2 to 10
reps for assistance exercises, depending on the training phase. Rest periods
between sets usually last about two to five minutes. See table 8.7 for a sample
squat training workout. A detailed description of the proper exercise technique
during the squat is covered in chapter 21. Proper form is essential for maximal
strength on the squat; the Squatter’s Rights box presents tips for increasing squat
strength.
                        Squatters’ Rights

Closely follow these tips for safe execution of the squat:

Setup

Position a bar on a squat rack or power rack to about mid-chest height.

Hold the bar with a wide overhand grip and duck under it so that your
neck is directly in the middle of the bar. Push your back up into the bar
so that the bar is no more than two inches below the top of your
shoulders.

Stand up with the bar on your back to unrack it and step back from the
rack.

Grip

Hold the bar with an overhand grip and wrap your thumbs around the
bar. Bring your hands in as close to your shoulders as possible.

Use your hands to press the bar against your back and pull your shoulder
blades together and your elbows forward to support the bar.




Head

Keep your head aligned with your spine by keeping it up and looking
straight ahead or slightly up.

Torso

Maintain the arch in your lower back and pull your shoulders back while
pushing your chest up and out.
Isometrically contract your spinal erector muscles and abdominals to
keep your core tight.

Stance

Place your feet shoulder-width apart or wider—this depends on your
preference. Individual biomechanics come into play, and you must find
the foot position that is most comfortable for you. If your feet are too
close together, it makes it difficult for the hamstrings and glutes to
properly assist the quads. If your feet are too wide apart, the opposite
will occur and your quads will not be able to assist. If you have long
legs, going much wider than shoulder width tends to be more
comfortable and more biomechanically advantageous. If you are of
average height and have legs that are proportional to the length of your
upper body, you will likely be comfortable with your feet just slightly
wider than shoulder width. If you have short legs, a shoulder-width
stance will probably be most comfortable.

Maintain a slight bend in your knees and isometrically contract your
quads, hamstrings, and glutes before descending.




Descent

To descend, stick your glutes out and descend as if you were to sit down
on a chair until your thighs are parallel to the floor or lower.

Keep your hips under the bar as much as possible to avoid excessive
    forward lean of your torso.

    Be sure that your heels do not come off the floor.

    Ascent

    Transition from the descent to the ascent by driving forcefully upward
    with the legs. Concentrate on moving your hips first before your knees.
    As you push up, force your knees out hard and push out on the sides of
    your shoes while you squat. This helps to keep the tension in your hips
    for greater strength.

    As you ascend, thrust the head back. Don’t lift your chin up; just push
    your head back to help contract your traps.

    Breathing

    Take a big breath in and hold it as you descend into the squat.

    Exhale as you pass the most difficult stage of the squat.



Deadlift Training
The deadlift is considered the best indicator of overall body strength. Because
you must hold the bar in the hands while driving it upward from the floor with
the legs, it truly involves a majority of the body’s musculature. It is called the
deadlift because the weight is lifted from the floor. This eliminates the eccentric
motion that precedes most exercises such as the squat and bench press. The
eccentric motion aids the force that is produced by the muscles during the
concentric phase of a lift. Therefore, the deadlift is a much more difficult lift
than the squat.

As with the squat and bench press, to increase your strength on the deadlift, you
must train the deadlift. This means that you must devote at least one workout per
week to specific deadlift training. You should perform the deadlift first in the
workout when the muscles are strongest and not fatigued. Many powerlifters
follow the deadlift exercise with assistance hamstring exercises such as the
Romanian deadlift or leg curl. Depending on the training split used, many
powerlifters also train back and sometimes biceps on deadlift day. This strategy
makes sense, since these muscle groups are used during the deadlift.

Usually about three to five sets, not including warm-up sets, are performed for
the deadlift. All assistance exercises, such as the leg curl, are usually limited to
three sets per exercise. As with the other two strength exercises, the weight on
the deadlift should progressively increase from very light warm-up sets (weight
around 10 to 50 percent RM) to heavy working sets (ranging from 85 to 95
percent RM). This is the range that most lifters use in training the deadlift.
However, the weight used during some workouts may go as high as 100 percent
RM or as low as 50 percent RM for working sets. For assistance exercises, reps
typically correspond with the percent RM being used in that workout on the
deadlift. So reps tend to fall mostly in the range of 2 to 10 for assistance
exercises, depending on the training phase. Rest periods between sets usually
last about two to five minutes. See table 8.8 for a sample deadlift training
workout. A detailed description of the proper exercise technique during the
deadlift is covered in chapter 25. Proper form is essential for developing
maximal strength in the deadlift. The Life of the Deadlift box presents tips that
will ensure you are performing the deadlift most effectively for maximal
strength.
                       Life of the Deadlift

Closely follow these tips to execute the deadlift safely and effectively.
Two styles of deadlift—the regular-stance deadlift and the sumo-stance
deadlift—are acceptable in competition. The regular-stance version has
the feet a little closer than shoulder-width apart, whereas the sumo-stance
deadlift has the feet spaced apart much wider than shoulder-width. There
is no consensus that has established the clear benefits of one form over
the other. Therefore, the choice is pure preference of the individual. Both
styles are covered in the following description.

Setup
Set up a barbell on the floor with the desired amount of weight.

Approach the loaded barbell until your shins are touching the bar.




Legs

Your stance should be about as wide as your own shoulders or narrower
for the regular-stance deadlift. For the sumo-stance deadlift, the feet
should be much farther apart than shoulder width.

For the regular-stance deadlift, toes should point straight forward or
slightly out (25 degrees at most). For the sumo-stance deadlift, toes
should point out to about 30 to 40 degrees.

Squat down to a position that is similar to the bottom position of the
squat. However, in the regular-stance deadlift the thighs will be slightly
higher than parallel to the floor. With the sumo-stance deadlift, the thighs
will be about parallel to the floor. Most of your weight should be on the
heels of the feet to facilitate maximal contribution of the glutes and
hamstrings.

Grip

Regardless of the style used, your grip should be a staggered grip. That
means one hand should be an underhand grip and the other hand should
be an overhand grip. This helps to prevent the bar from slipping out of
the hands.
For the regular-stance deadlift, the arms will hang straight down and just
outside of your thighs. For the sumo-stance deadlift, the arms hang
straight down on the insides of the thighs.




Torso

For the regular-stance deadlift, the upper body should lean slightly
forward at about a 45-degree angle to the floor.

For the sumo-stance deadlift, the upper body is slightly more upright
than in the regular-stance deadlift (about a 50-to 60-degree angle to the
floor).

Regardless of the style used, the shoulder blades should be pulled
together tightly throughout the entire exercise.

Isometrically contract your low-back muscles to maintain the natural
arch in your lower back. Keep your abs tightly contracted throughout the
lift.

Head

The head should remain in a straight line with the back. To do this, pick a
point on the floor about five to six feet ahead of you and focus on that
point.
   Ascent

   As you stand up with the weight, imagine pushing the floor away from
   you with your feet.

   Your hips and shoulders should ascend together. During the ascent, the
   bar will travel as close to the shins and legs as possible

   Lockout

   You have reached the finish point when you have full extension of the
   knees, hips, and back. The lockout position should position the front part
   of your shoulders behind the front part of your hips.

   Breathing

   Take a big breath in and hold it as you prepare to ascend.

   Exhale as you pass the most difficult stage of the deadlift. Inhale again at
   the top and hold your breath before the return.

   Descent

   Carefully return the bar to the floor by reversing the techniques used in
   lifting the weight up.



Abdominal and Low-Back Training
Powerlifters and other strength athletes do train their abs. However, unlike the
bodybuilder who is interested in developing the musculature of the abdominals
to chisel a well-defined six-pack, the strength athlete is interested in developing
the strength of the abdominal musculature. The same can be said about the low
back. Both the superficial and deep muscles of the abdominals and low back
make up the core musculature of the body. These muscles support the shoulders,
spine, and hips during all movements. Building the strength of these muscles not
only helps to prevent back injuries but can help to increase strength due to the
fact that the body’s foundation is stronger. For a complete listing and exercise
description of the abdominal and core exercises, see chapter 24. For exercises of
the low back, see chapter 16.

You should do core, abdominal, and low-back exercises toward the end of
workouts to prevent fatiguing of the core musculature before doing the major
strength exercises with heavy weights. Many powerlifters do one or two core,
abdominal, and low-back exercises at the end of two to four workouts per week.
Some even have a distinct core training day.

Core exercises, if included in a workout, are usually trained first in the series
with abdominal and low-back exercises. The number of reps varies depending on
the type of exercise. For core and low-back exercises, higher reps in the range of
20 to 30 are acceptable. However, many powerlifters train the good morning
exercise with extremely heavy weight and lower reps in the range of 6 to 12. For
ab exercises, many powerlifters also prefer to train with heavier weight and
lower reps (6 to 10) to increase abdominal muscle strength. See table 8.9 for a
sample core program that can be performed twice per week at the end of typical
strength workouts, with at least 48 hours of rest between workouts. It includes
one core exercise, one low-back exercise, and one abdominal exercise per
workout.
              Chapter 9
   Programs for Maximizing Strength
Training to maximize strength tends to be a much simpler pursuit than training to
maximize muscle mass. The basic workout samples provided with the training
splits discussed in chapter 8 are from tried-and-true training programs that work
exceptionally well when the resistance used and reps performed are cycled.
However, as the saying goes, everything works, but nothing works forever. And
so, when a standard program fails to deliver the strength gains you expect, it’s
time to try something out of the ordinary.

This chapter covers strength training methods that are effective for maximizing
muscle strength. As in chapter 6, the techniques are categorized by the type of
acute variable of training that is being manipulated in each workout. Also as in
chapter 6, each technique is rated on a scale of 1 to 5 for four critical areas:

 1. Time—the amount of time that the specific workout typically takes to
    complete. This helps you immediately determine if this training technique
    will fit your training schedule. The higher the number, the longer the
    workouts for that specific technique will take to complete.
 2. Length—the amount of time required to follow the program consistently
    for appreciable results to be noticed. This helps you determine if you have
    the patience required for a certain program to demonstrate adequate results
    in strength. The higher the number, the longer this technique must be
    followed for results to be realized.
 3. Difficulty—the amount of weightlifting experience required to use the
    program effectively. This helps you decide if you have enough training
    experience to take on specific strength training techniques. The higher the
    number, the more training experience you should have before attempting
    that particular technique.
 4. Results—how effective the program seems to be for strength gains in most
    people. This helps you estimate how much strength you can expect to gain
    with each program. The higher the number, the greater the gains in strength
    you can expect from a particular program.

Each strength training method provides a sample table to show how this
particular technique can be used. Some of these tables provide full training
programs complete with sample workouts to be followed over several weeks.
Others provide only brief details on cycling weight throughout the program. For
these you are encouraged to use a basic training program, as shown in chapter 8,
but incorporate the weight, rep, set, or rest changes as outlined in the sample
program table. Try the advanced strength training programs discussed in chapter
9 by cycling them into your training program along with the basic programs
discussed in chapter 8. These advanced programs are great to turn to when your
strength gains have reached a plateau. The unorthodox nature of many of these
programs will offer a unique stimulus to the muscles, which will encourage
strength gains. In the programs, weights are given in pounds; please see
appendix for metric conversions.


            Programs That Manipulate Sets
When it comes to quantifying the strength training workout, the set is the unit
that all lifters understand. It signifies how much work you are actually doing.
Therefore, manipulating the work in a workout is a logical way to alter workouts
in an effort to boost strength. This section covers three strength training
techniques that alter the sets during a workout. The first method incorporates
sets that are completed only when the muscle is too exhausted to complete
another rep. The second method involves using a set system that is based on
time. The third method decreases the number of sets it takes to complete a set
number of reps.


                              Failure Training
As defined in chapter 1, muscle failure is the point during an exercise at which
the muscles have fully fatigued and can no longer complete an additional rep of
that exercise using strict form. While bodybuilders tend to complete all their sets
to failure, powerlifters rarely, if ever, train to muscle failure. In fact, the
programs in chapter 8 are not meant to be used with muscle failure. Each set is
done for a certain number of reps with a certain amount of weight. When the
number of reps prescribed for that set are completed, the set is over. In most
cases, you will feel as though you could have completed at least one more rep.
This is how most powerlifters train to increase muscle strength. Many believe
that training to muscle failure can hinder strength gains. However, research from
Australia suggests that training to muscle failure may enhance strength gains.
The key appears to be the number of sets performed to failure—and that number
appears to be one.

Australian researchers discovered that when trained lifters completed one set to
failure of the four sets they trained with on the bench press for eight weeks, they
had double the strength gains of lifters who did not complete any of the four sets
to failure. And in a follow-up study, they discovered that doing more than one
set to failure on the bench press for eight weeks offered no additional increase in
strength gains. In fact, when comparing the two studies, the strength gains
reported in the study using multiple sets to failure were less impressive than the
strength gains reported in the study using just one set to failure. The reason may
be that performing only one set to failure allows for enough stimulus to be
delivered to the muscle fibers without fatiguing the muscle too much, which can
limit muscle strength during the workout when training with too many sets to
failure.

Taking advantage of this knowledge is rather simple. Choose any basic strength
training program offered in chapter 8 and be sure to perform the last set, and
only the last set, of every exercise (except the abdominals) to muscle failure. See
table 9.1 for a sample training program that takes the last set of each exercise to
failure. One caveat about training to failure is safety. For obvious reasons, it is
not a method to be used by those who train alone, except when done with
exercises that use machines or where it is easy to return the weight to a safe
location—such as the deadlift, dumbbell bench press, Smith machine squat, or
barbell curl. Under no circumstances should anyone training alone perform any
barbell pressing exercises, barbell squat, leg press, or hack squat to failure or
close to failure. These exercises all require the help of an adequate spotter to
ensure that the last rep is done accurately and safely.
                           Time Under Tension
Time under tension (TUT) refers to a different way to define a set. Instead of a
set being defined by the number of reps performed, a TUT set is defined by the
length of time it takes to complete the set. The time it takes to complete the set is
referred to as the time the muscle is under tension. Tension refers to the
resistance from the weight being used. The amount of time spent doing each set
for an exercise can be a critical component to increasing strength. Consider a set
of five reps on the bench press. If the five reps each took about 2 seconds to
lower the weight and another 2 seconds to press the weight back up, that’s 4
seconds per rep. Five reps at this pace would take a total of about 20 seconds to
complete the set. In other words, the TUT for that set would be 20 seconds. If the
time to complete each of those five reps were increased to 6 seconds, the TUT of
that set would increase to 30 seconds. Although the number of reps and the
amount of weight are the same on each of these sets, the first set with a TUT of
20 seconds is actually better for increasing strength.

Just as it is well established that muscle strength is best developed by training
with a rep range of 1 to 6 per set, and muscle growth is best attained with a rep
range of about 8 to 12, some strength training experts believe that the total time a
set takes to complete may be just as important as the number of reps completed
per set. Although no controlled research has yet been done to determine the best
TUT ranges for developing strength or muscle mass, anecdotal evidence from
strength trainers suggests that the best TUT range for strength is about 4 to 20
seconds per set and about 40 to 60 seconds per set for muscle growth. Table 9.2
shows you the optimal rep range and TUT for the desired muscle adaptation. The
last column lists the time per rep range to complete the set within the optimal
TUT.

Regardless of the importance of TUT for muscle adaptations, no one has
suggested that TUT ranges should replace optimal rep ranges. Instead,
combining both TUT and optimal rep ranges within a set may be a more precise
way to prescribe how much work should be placed on a muscle to induce the
desired adaptations. Using the bench press as an example, if five reps (which is
within the optimal rep range for strength gains) were performed at 4 seconds per
rep, the entire set would take 20 seconds to complete. That set would meet both
the requirements for the optimal rep range and optimal TUT range to stress a
muscle for maximizing strength gains. However, training for maximal strength
using TUT allows you to increase the rep range a bit beyond the optimal rep
range for maximal strength, as long as the TUT range per set meets the
requirements for maximal strength. This allows for more variety in the training
program while still staying on target for inducing strength gains.

To train for maximal strength using TUT, keep your rep range at one to eight
reps per set and the TUT range at 4 to 20 seconds per set. Both the rep range and
TUT range should change frequently, as any good periodized program should.
See table 9.3 for a sample TUT strength training program that frequently cycles
reps and TUT. Choose a workout program from the training split section in
chapter 8 and change the number of reps, rep speed, and TUT weekly as
prescribed in the table. The best way to use the TUT method is to train with a
stopwatch to monitor the TUT for each set.
                        Diminishing-Set Method
The goal of the diminishing-set method is to complete 70 reps of an exercise in
four sets. To start, you choose a weight at which you can perform about 20 reps
of the exercise of choice. The first time you go through this, it will probably take
you about six to eight sets, with two-minute rest periods between sets, to
complete 70 repetitions. Your goal is to eventually get the 70 total repetitions
done in four sets or fewer. The benefit of this method is that it encourages
strength changes and muscle growth by altering the biochemical pathways in the
muscle fibers. Over time, the muscles are able to perform more reps per set
because they are better at generating energy for muscle contractions. In addition,
they are able to recover more fully between sets because of more efficient
biochemical pathways. This method is great for developing endurance strength
and therefore is best to use during periods in your strength training cycle when
reps are on the high end. See table 9.4 for a sample diminishing-set workout for
the bench press. A great way to use this method is to do this for two exercises
per muscle group using this method for both exercises. For example, follow up
the bench press workout with a diminishing-set protocol for one other chest
exercise, such as the incline dumbbell bench press.
      Programs That Manipulate Repetitions
Maximal strength is all about the single repetition. How strong a person is
usually is measured by the amount of weight he or she can lift for one rep.
However, it’s rare to train for strength by doing single reps. Instead, a variety of
rep ranges are used to benefit the one-rep max. This section covers strength
training programs that manipulate the repetitions that are performed during each
set. This includes programs that alter the number of reps performed per set (such
as the 6 by 6 by 6 system, 5 by 10 training, 16-week drop, 5–3–2 method, and
higher-strength program) as well as programs that manipulate the way each
repetition is performed (such as static strength training, stronger by the inch
program, ballistic training, and negative-rep training).
                           6 by 6 by 6 System
Similar to the other numeral-driven programs, this one involves simply picking a
weight that will allow you to perform six sets of six repetitions on an exercise.
The ideal weight will take you to failure only on the last set. Because of the
higher volume and intensity involved, muscle groups should not be trained more
than twice per week. The benefit of using this rep range is that it builds both a
good deal of strength and muscle mass. The goal is to increase the weight used
on each exercise by the end of the six-week program. Increase the weight when
you can do more than six reps on the sixth set. See table 9.5 for a sample six-
week 6 by 6 by 6 workout program that follows an upper-and lower-body
training split.
                              5 by 10 Training
The 5 by 10 training program uses two distinct rep ranges to maximize both
strength and muscle-mass gains. The 5 portion of the program comes from the 5
by 5 training method, or five sets of five reps with two-minute rest periods
between sets. It is a method for developing strength that dates to the 1950s. The
goal of the 5 by 5 workout is to do five sets of five reps with a given weight. On
your first workout you should pick a heavy weight that allows you to get only
five reps on the first set and possibly five on your second. This should be about
85 percent RM for most exercises. If you can get five reps on the third set, the
weight you chose was too light; you’ll need to add 5 to 10 pounds depending on
the exercise. If, on the other hand, you can’t get at least 14 total reps over the
five sets, the weight you chose was too heavy; you’ll need to drop about 5 to 10
pounds. When you find the right weight for the exercise, stay with that weight
over the course of this workout until you can do all five sets for five reps. Then
you’ll start over and increase the weight again to one that allows you to get only
five reps on the first set. Do this on two exercises for each muscle group (for
example, bench press and incline dumbbell bench press, squat and leg press, and
deadlift and Romanian deadlift). For all other exercises that follow in that
workout, do three sets of five to seven reps (except for calf and ab exercises,
which can be done at higher reps).

The 10 portion of the 5 by 10 program comes from the 10 by 10 program used in
this workout scheme. The goal is to perform 10 sets of 10 reps with a given
weight. The reason this is included in a strength program is to stimulate the
muscle fibers with a different stimulus in each workout. The schemes of the 5 by
5 and the 10 by 10 are similar, but different weights, reps, and total sets are used
for each. This cycling of weight, reps, and sets prevents the muscle fibers from
stagnating in the program, and therefore it enhances muscle adaptation.

For the 10 by 10 training, do 10 sets of 10 reps with just one exercise per
workout and follow it with three sets of 8 to 10 reps on all the subsequent
assistance exercises for that workout (except for calf and ab exercises, which can
be done at higher reps). For the 10 by 10 training, choose a weight that you can
normally get for about 12 to 15 reps. This should be about 65 to 70 percent RM
for most exercises. The first few sets will feel very light. This will serve as a
thorough warm-up. Perform these early sets with explosive power on each rep to
recruit more of the fast-twitch muscle fibers that are capable of greater gains in
strength and power. As the sets continue, the fatigue will start to set in and the
number of reps will fall drastically. As with the 5 by 5 program, once you can
complete 10 sets of 10 reps, you increase the weight again and start over.

Because you will reach failure several times on each workout, you should train
each muscle group only once per week, such as with the squat–bench press–
deadlift training split. This split is used in the sample 5 by 10 program outline in
table 9.6. Simply follow this split and alternate the weight, reps, and sets every
other week. You’ll likely reach the 5 by 5 goal first. Increase the weight again
and continue progressing until you reach the 10 by 10 goal or eight weeks have
passed. Then switch over to a more basic training scheme.
                               16-Week Drop
This program is a stepwise progression from lighter weight and higher reps to
heavy weight and low reps over a 16-week period. The 16-week drop is a great
program for beginner and intermediate weightlifters who are interested in
peaking maximal strength. Because it starts with lighter weight and higher reps
and slowly increases the weight while decreasing the reps over the 16 weeks, it
allows the beginner enough time to work with higher reps and lower intensities
before jumping into the heavy-weight and low-rep training that is required to
boost maximal strength. It works well with any training split, including a whole-
body strength training split. This program starts with sets of 12 reps with a
weight that is about 70 percent RM for three weeks. Then the reps drop to 10 per
set with a weight increase to about 75 percent RM for the next three weeks. Next
the weight bumps up to 80 percent RM and the reps drop to 8 per set for the next
three weeks. Following that, the weight increases again to 85 percent RM and
reps drop to five per set for the next three weeks. This is followed by a bump in
weight to 90 percent RM and a corresponding drop in reps to four per set for
three more weeks. And finally, the last week is associated with an increase in
weight to 95 percent RM as reps drop down to two per set. One-rep max testing
on all three exercises can be done after this final week of training. See table 9.7
for a sample 16-week drop program.
                               5–3–2 Method
This 10-week maximal-strength peaking program is best used by those with at
least one year of solid training experience. It starts off heavy and gets even
heavier throughout the program. It is a simple program to follow because the rep
ranges correspond with the number of weeks you should train with that rep
range. The first five weeks is a 5 by 5 program where you stick with a weight
that allows you to get five sets of five reps. Then for the next three weeks you
bump it up to a weight that allows you to get three sets of three reps, or a 3 by 3
program. You finish with two weeks of training with a weight that allows you to
get only two sets of two reps, or a 2 by 2 program. Similar to other weight
progression schemes for increasing strength, this program works because it
slowly increases the weight until a weight close to the one-rep max is being
used. See table 9.8 for a sample 10-week 5–3–2 program that will boost strength
on all three major lifts. This sample program uses a push–pull training split.
                       Higher-Strength Program
This program is based on research from Japan that has discovered when one set
of very high reps is added to the last set of each exercise, strength gains are
better than when training with just low reps. They studied leg strength in
subjects on a 10-week program of leg presses and leg extensions. One group
trained with five sets of three to five reps while the second group added one set
of 25 to 30 reps at the end of each exercise. The group that added the 25 to 30
reps had a 5 percent greater increase in strength, as well as greater increases in
muscle size, than the group performing just five sets of 3 to 5 reps. Although the
scientists were unsure of the exact mechanism for the additional strength gains,
it appears that the single set of higher reps provides an additional training
stimulus that affects strength gains. The higher levels of growth hormone
associated with the higher-rep training may have affected adaptations in muscle
fibers that could have increased the strength of the muscle fibers. Taking
advantage of this information is as simple as adding one set of 25 to 30 reps with
a weight that is only about 45 to 50 percent RM to a program that incorporates a
5 by 5 strength training system. Be sure to take this final set to muscle failure.
Since this program is fairly demanding on the muscle fibers, you should train
each muscle group just once per week while using this program in table 9.9.
Follow it for no more than eight weeks.
                        Static Strength Training
This method involves holding a heavy weight at the end of the positive phase of
a rep for up to 20 seconds. Although using a full range of motion (ROM) is
typically a smart thing to do, there are occasions when going against the norm is
warranted, such as when strength gains have come to a halt regardless of the
programs you have tried. When this is the case, it’s time to pull out all the stops
and use something quite unorthodox—such as static strength training. The term
static means lack of movement, as in an isometric contraction. And as this term
implies, with static training you take a weight and hold it in a fixed position for
several seconds. This concept is based on the idea that by forcing the muscle to
work only when it is maximally contracted and using the heaviest weight
possible, you can optimize its strength potential.

Although there is no published research to support its effectiveness, anecdotal
reports on static strength training are quite impressive. In fact, Bob Hoffman,
founder of the York Barbell Company and former U.S. Olympic weightlifting
coach, had members of the U.S. team use a similar training system with much
success in the early 1960s. The late Mike Mentzer, professional bodybuilder,
also touted the effectiveness of static contractions for building both muscle size
and strength. It appears to work because of the overload that is placed on the
muscle. When you train using a full ROM, the amount of weight you can use is
limited by your sticking point—the point in the exercise ROM where you’re
weakest. You can use only as much weight as you can lift through that sticking
point. With static contractions, the sticking point is eliminated, so you can
overload the muscle fibers with as much weight as you can hold for at least 10
seconds in the strongest position of the particular muscle.

To use static strength training properly, be sure to start each workout with a
thorough warm-up. Do two light sets of each exercise you’re training statically.
On each rep, stop and hold for a count of three at about two to four inches from
the end of the full contraction. Hit a third warm-up set with a weight you can do
for about six reps, but do only one rep—being sure to hold it for a count of three
before ending the set. Do two static sets per exercise with two minutes of rest in
between sets. The weight you choose should be light enough to allow you to
hold it statically at about two to four inches from the full contraction point of the
movement for at least 10 seconds but heavy enough so that you can’t hold it for
more than 20 seconds. See the following sample photos of static contraction hold
positions for common exercises. Once you can hold a weight for more than 20
seconds, it’s time to increase the weight. After the second set, drop the weight
and do three full-ROM sets of that exercise.

You’ll need a reliable training partner to help you with this training method.
Your training partner will need to help you move the weight to the static position
but should apply only enough force as needed to help you get the weight there.
That will help to prepare your muscles to resist the weight during the static
contraction. The training partner should also watch the clock during your static
sets to make sure you are within the time window of 10 to 20 seconds per set. A
Smith machine makes a good tool to use for many of the static contraction
exercises because it is easier to set the weight in the correct position.

Try the static strength training program outlined in table 9.10 for eight weeks
before returning to full-ROM training. The goal is to progress to heavier weights
for the static contraction sets over the eight weeks. This should carry over to
greater strength when you return to full-ROM training. This sample static
strength training workout uses an upper-and lower-body powerlifting split.
Static Contraction Hold Positions
Static bench press.
Static squat.
Static deadlift.
Static shoulder press.
Static seated row.
Static triceps pressdown.
Static barbell curl.
Static standing calf raise.
                    Stronger by the Inch Program
This strength training program takes advantage of overload by starting with a
weight that is greater than the lifter’s 1RM. This weight is performed for partial-
ROM reps that gradually increase in ROM until the full ROM is completed. It is
a method to use sparingly, such as when all other strength training methods have
failed to provide sufficient gains in strength. This method of using progressive
partial reps to grow stronger works best for compound movements such as the
three major strength lifts: bench press, squat, and deadlift. To follow the stronger
by the inch program safely and effectively, you should perform the lifts in a
power rack. This allows you to accurately measure the ROM and keep it limited
to where you want it. The pins will also act as a safety net for when you fail. See
the Rack It Up box for setting up properly in the rack.

You start the program with about 10 percent more weight than your current one-
rep max (1RM) for the lift on which you wish to increase your strength. For
example, if your max bench press is 250 pounds, you should use about 275 for
the Stronger by the Inch program. The program works best if you concentrate on
using it for one lift at a time and train each major lift just once per week. The
first week, start by doing a four-inch partial rep: Lower the bar only four inches
(10 centimeters) from the top position of the exercise, near lockout. Each week
you’ll attempt to lower the ROM by lowering the pins in the rack by two inches
(five centimeters). If you get stuck at a setting and can’t get one rep, increase the
pin height by two inches and complete the workout from there. Next week,
lower the pin by two inches and try again. If you don’t stick it at this point, strip
off some plates to find a weight at which you can complete the partial rep. This
is the new weight with which you’ll finish the program. The goal is to lower the
weight an additional two inches each week until you’re about four inches above
the bottom position. If you don’t progress to this point by eight weeks, stop
where you are and test your 1RM. You should still show some improvement on
your strength in the full ROM for that lift.

This method of progressive partials works because of overload. By using a
weight that’s heavier than you could normally handle for full-range reps, you
overload the majority of the muscle fibers that perform the full-ROM version of
the exercise. Although your strength increase will be mainly in the small ROM
you’re using, some of this will carry over into the lower portions of the ROM.
By slowly lowering the ROM in two-inch increments, you allow the muscle
fibers to adapt to the heavier weight and slowly increase the ROM to which your
new strength can be applied.

Table 9.11 shows a sample bench press program set up for a lifter with an 18-
inch range of motion and a 275-pound 1RM using 300 as his or her new weight.
Table 9.12 shows a sample program for incorporating partial rep training on the
bench press into a workout program.
                            Rack It Up
Follow these steps to get set up in the power rack for progressive
partials.
         Measure the distance between safety pin settings (holes) on the
         rack. Most racks will have holes spaced every 2 to 4 inches (5 to 10
         centimeters).
         Determine the top position in your ROM, just before lockout. Use
         the pinhole just below this to designate your top point.
         Determine the bottom position of your ROM and designate it with
         the lower pinhole.
         Count the number of pin settings between the top and bottom
         positions. The distance will probably range from 12 to 24 inches
         (30.5 to 61 centimeters), depending on your limb length and the
         exercise you’re doing. Therefore, the number of pin settings will
         likely range from 2 to 10 holes. Your progression scheme will be
         based partly on this number.
         Subtract 4 inches from the top, meaning you won’t use the first one
         or two pin settings.
         Subtract 4 inches from the bottom, meaning you won’t work below
         4 inches from the bottom position. (Once you’re close to this point,
         you’ll likely be able to perform a full rep with the weight.) In other
         words, you won’t work down to the last one or two pegs.
         Now count the number of pin settings between these two settings.
         This should be somewhere from one to seven holes.
         If the rack you’re using has setting increments larger than 2 inches,
         you’ll need to modify it so that you make 2-inch progressions over
         the course of the program. You can use bar pads, towels, or 2.5-
         pound plates (most have about a 2-inch radius).



                       Ballistic Strength Training
This training method develops explosive power, which can increase strength.
This is because each strength exercise has a natural biomechanical sticking point
that occurs at a spot in the range of motion where primary muscle groups are
changing. For example, in the bench press, the sticking point for many lifters is
where the primary force is being changed from the pectoralis major to the
deltoids and triceps. Ballistic training uses explosive movements that power you
through these sticking points.

The major benefit of ballistic training has to do with acceleration. In a traditional
rep, you typically accelerate the weight on the concentric portion only during the
first third of the range of motion. During the other two-thirds, the weight is
actually being decelerated. If deceleration did not take place, you wouldn’t be
able to hold onto the weight at the end of the rep. Yet, when you train
ballistically, the weight is accelerated through the whole range of motion and
starts to decelerate only after you’ve let go of the bar. This allows you to develop
much more power through the rep.

Ballistic training also forces your body to trigger fast-twitch muscle fibers. This
is important because these fibers have the greatest potential for strength gains.
Because ballistic training forces the muscles to adapt to contracting very quickly
and forcefully, it trains the fast-twitch fibers to produce a great amount of force
in a very short period. This is very useful when applying a great amount of force
such as during a max bench press, squat, or deadlift.

Ballistic training is most commonly performed with bench press throws and
squat jumps, often using a Smith machine, which guides the bar securely along
metal rods. Yet, ballistic training is not confined to these exercises. In fact,
ballistic training can be done for almost any muscle group. See table 9.13 for a
list of ballistic exercises that can be performed in any gym.

Regardless of the exercise, ballistic training should be done with a weight that is
about 30 to 50 percent of the 1RM for that exercise. This weight is used because
research has shown that optimal power is produced at about 30 to 50 percent
RM. For example, if your max bench press is 300 pounds, you would do bench
press throws on the Smith machine with about 90 to 150 pounds. The number of
reps performed with ballistic training is three to five reps, never any more. This
is to keep every rep a max effort and prevent fatigue. Fatigue does not benefit
the development of power and can actually increase the risk of injury when
training ballistically. Therefore, rest time should be ample between sets. Take at
least three minutes of rest before doing another set.

A great way to work ballistic training into your regimen is to use a max effort–
dynamic effort training split and perform the ballistic training during the
dynamic effort portion of the split. An example of this is outlined in table 9.14 to
be done on the third and fourth workouts (usually on Thursday and Friday) of a
max effort–dynamic effort training split. Another way to train ballistically is to
follow a squat, bench press, and deadlift training split on a full-body ballistic
workout performed on a fourth day. An example of such a workout is presented
in table 9.15.
                   Negative-Rep Strength Training
Negative-rep training refers to training that emphasizes the negative, or
eccentric, portion of the exercise. Unlike negative-rep training to build muscle
mass, negative-rep strength training does not come as an afterthought at the end
of a workout but as the first and foremost method used in the workout. Doing
negative reps as the first sets of an exercise allows for greater than 100 percent
RM to be used as weight. Most lifters can resist about 130 percent of their 1RM
on the negative portion of the rep. Training with this much weight even on the
negative motion of an exercise can cause real strength gains on the positive
portion of the exercise as well. This has to do with muscle fiber and nerve
adaptations. The overload that the excess weight places on the muscle fiber
induces muscle damage and influences the nerves that cause the muscles to
recruit more fast-twitch muscle fibers. These two factors result in muscle
regeneration that leads to larger and stronger muscle fibers as well as a greater
number of fast-twitch muscle fibers.

When training with negative reps, the key is to perform the rep slowly. You
should attempt a weight that is about 130 percent of your 1RM for the exercises
you are training and resist it at a rate that takes three to five seconds to complete
the negative rep. If you can resist the weight for longer than five seconds, add
more weight. If you can’t resist the weight for at least three seconds, reduce the
weight. Perform three sets of four to six negative reps for each major lift—bench
press, squats (should be done on Smith machine), and deadlift. Follow the
negatives with two sets of regular reps using a weight that is about 75 to 80
percent RM.

Because of the intensity of negative-rep training, you’ll need more time to
recover between sets, at least three minutes. The same holds true for recovery
between workouts, because you should allow a full seven days of rest between
workouts. That makes the squat–bench press–deadlift training split a popular one
to use when training with negative-rep training. See table 9.16 for a sample
negative-rep training week using that split. Follow this for no more than six
weeks.

To use negative-rep training safely and effectively, you should have the help of a
training partner. Those who train alone can do unilateral negatives with the help
of a Smith machine. To do this, load the Smith machine with about 70 percent
RM for the bench press, squat, or deadlift. Lift the weight through the positive,
or concentric, portion of the lift, but resist the weight through the negative
portion with only one limb. Switch the limb that takes the negative rep every
other rep until each limb has performed four to six negative reps.

Finally, you should be aware of delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS) that
usually accompanies negative-rep training. For those unaccustomed to negative-
rep training, DOMS can be severe. The more often you use the technique, the
less severe the soreness will be. Some people may be at risk for developing a
rare condition known as rhabdomyolysis. This sometimes-fatal condition can
occur after severe muscle damage. When muscles break down, they release
potassium, enzymes, and myoglobin into the blood. Myoglobin can accumulate
in the kidneys and cause them to collapse. This can escalate into dangerously
high blood potassium levels and may result in heart failure. To prevent
rhabdomyolysis while using negative-rep training, drink plenty of water (up to
one gallon per day), limit alcohol consumption, avoid training with negatives for
several weeks after a viral infection, and go to the hospital immediately if your
urine turns dark brown.
           Programs That Manipulate Load
Strength is all about weight. The amount of weight you can lift defines your
level of strength. Because of this, it is only logical that strength training
programs that vary the weight you lift are successful strategies for building
muscle strength. This section discusses strength training techniques that alter the
load, or amount of weight, used during workouts. Some techniques work through
mechanisms involving the nervous system, such as the max-out for muscle
strength method and wave training method. The 5 percent method works by
systematically increasing and decreasing the weight over time, while the
DeLorme ascending pyramid progressively increases the weight on each
successive set. One program—the same-weight training method—uses the same
weight for all sets. Modifying the weight you train with by following any of
these programs will work to increase the total amount of weight you can lift.

              Max-Out for Muscle Strength Method
This method takes advantage of a phenomenon known formally as postactivation
potentiation, or simply potentiation. This refers to the ability of one exercise to
immediately enhance the performance of a second exercise that is performed
shortly after the first exercise. Although there are many ways to do this, the max-
out for muscle strength method uses the same exercise but different weights to
achieve the same effect. More precisely, this method uses a one-rep set with 90
percent RM to enhance the number of reps that can be performed with a
subsequent set using 80 percent RM.

Although the exact mechanism for this phenomenon has not been pinpointed,
scientists currently believe that it may be due to enhanced excitation of the
central nervous system or to molecular events in the muscle fibers themselves. In
simpler terms, performing the heavy set “tricks” your nervous system into
preparing for another heavy set. When you suddenly drop the weight, it feels
lighter than it normally would because your nervous system is calling in more
muscle fibers to do the job than it normally would for the lighter weight. This is
the reason baseball players swing with a weighted bat before hitting with a much
lighter bat. Regardless of the mechanism, the bottom line is that it may increase
your strength on lighter sets by close to 10 percent.

To perform this method in the gym, you do one set using 90 to 95 percent RM
for just one rep. Then you rest three minutes and perform a set with about 10
percent more than 80 percent RM (a weight you can normally lift for about eight
reps). The potentiation from the previous set should allow you to complete about
eight reps with the heavier weight. For example, if your 1RM on the bench press
is 300, the first set you do (after two or three warm-up sets) is for one rep with
about 275 to 285 pounds. The second set you do would be with 260 pounds for
about eight reps. Normally you would be able to lift only 240 pounds for eight
reps, but the potentiation increased your strength by roughly 10 percent.

The best way to use this technique is to reserve it for major lifts and train those
lifts just once per week. Do not use the max-out for muscle strength technique
for more than eight weeks consecutively for any exercise. See table 9.17 for a
sample squat workout using the max-out for muscle strength technique. This
workout is for a lifter whose 1RM on the squat is 365 pounds, whose 90% RM is
about 330 pounds, and whose 80% RM (what he or she can normally complete
for eight reps) is about 290 pounds. This workout should be followed with the
typical squat assistance exercises.
                             5 Percent Method
This program follows a set pattern of progression in the amount of weight lifted.
Basically, in each workout the weight lifted is increased by about 5 percent and
the number of reps performed is decreased by one. Although the 5 percent
program is a little more complicated than that, the result is simply an increase in
strength of about 10 percent after only six successive workouts. The 5 percent
program is best used on basic exercises such as the bench press, incline bench
press, squat, deadlift, leg press, shoulder press, barbell row, and pulldown. It can
also be adapted to basic arm exercises such as close-grip bench press, triceps
pressdown, triceps extension, and the barbell curl. Perform no more than three
exercises per muscle group and provide each with five to seven days of rest
between workouts. To start the 5 percent program, pick a weight for each
exercise that allows you to perform four sets of six reps with three-to four-
minute rest periods between sets. We’ll use the squat, with a weight of 300
pounds, as an example. In workout 1 you would perform four sets of the squat,
each for six reps using 300 pounds. For workout 2 you increase the weight by 5
percent—or to 315 pounds—and finish four sets of five reps. At workout 3 you
increase the weight by 5 percent again (from the original 300 pounds)—or 330
pounds—and do four sets of four reps. Workout 4 has a slight change. Here you
drop 5 percent of the weight from the previous workout—back to 315 pounds—
but you do four sets of six reps. At workout 5 you bump up the weight again by
5 percent to 330 pounds and do four sets of five reps. In workout six you
increase the weight again by 5 percent—or 345 pounds—and do four sets of four
reps. During the next workout, you should be able to get four sets of six reps
using 330 pounds—a nice 10 percent increase in strength. See table 9.18 for a
sample leg workout using the 5 percent method. Follow the leg press with other
assistance exercises performed for three sets of four to six reps each.

The best way to use the 5 percent method is by training each muscle group only
once per week to provide adequate recovery. The squat–bench press–deadlift
training split fares well for this technique.
                   Same-Weight Training Method
With this method the weight is maintained through all sets for that particular
exercise. The key is starting with a weight at which you can get more repetitions
than you will perform. For example, you should start with a weight at which you
can get seven or eight reps on your exercise of choice (about 80 percent RM),
but you’d perform only six reps. Rest only one to two minutes between sets. By
the third to fifth set you will struggle to be able to complete six reps. You end the
exercise once you fail to complete six reps. Your goal is to complete five sets of
six reps. Once you are able to do more than five sets of six reps with a weight,
increase the weight by 5 to 10 percent the next time and start the progression
over. See table 9.19 for a sample same-weight training program for the bench
press. In this example the lifter has a bench press 1RM of 315 pounds. This
lifter’s 80% RM for the bench press is 250 pounds. It takes the lifter seven
weeks to finish two cycles of same-weight training. Each of these workouts can
be followed with assistance exercises such as dumbbell bench press, barbell
shoulder, press, and triceps dip.

Reserve same-weight training for just the major lifts and follow these lifts with
assistance exercises for three sets of six to eight reps. Do two complete cycles
for each exercise you are training with the same weight training method. That is,
make it through one cycle of five sets of six reps and increase the weight. Then
continue to that cycle until you can do five sets of six reps with the new weight.
After that, switch back to a more basic training method. The same-weight
training method works well with almost any training split, particularly the squat–
bench press–deadlift training split.
                         Wave Training Method
This training method can boost your strength by up to 10 percent in only six to
eight weeks. This is due to the small progressions in weight that take place with
each wave. The waves actually allow you to lift up to 102 percent of your
current max right off the bat. While that may equate to only a few extra pounds,
over six to eight weeks the total expected strength boost is somewhere around 10
percent.

For this program, you’ll perform a few warm-up sets, then two or three waves of
three sets each, with four minutes of rest between waves and between each set.
During wave 1, your first set will consist of three reps with 90 percent RM (a
weight you can normally lift for about four reps). Set 2 consists of two reps with
95 percent RM. And on set 3, you’ll do one rep with 100 percent RM. On wave
2 you’ll increase the weight used on each set by about 1 percent. In other words,
set 1 will be about 91 percent RM, set 2 will be 96 percent RM, and set 3 will be
101 percent RM. Because this increment is so small and the smallest Olympic
plates are 1.25 pounds, this will equal a 2.5-pound jump on any weight under
400 pounds. For weights of 400 pounds or more, add 5 pounds. In either case, on
the third set of wave 2, you’ll be lifting more than your current max. If you’re up
for it, go for a third wave. To do so, simply increase the weight another 1 percent
for each set and go for the same number of reps on each set. That means 102
percent of your max on that third set.

The goal of wave training is to increase the weight used on each wave by 1 to 2
percent every workout. Bit by bit, you can notch up your overall strength. But if
you aren’t successful completing the last set of the last wave of a workout, start
the next workout with the same weights you used the previous time and really
push to break through on this round. Then you can raise the weight on the next
workout.

The reason wave training works has to do with potentiation—similar to the
potentiation discussed in the max-out for muscle strength method. The earlier
sets prime the nervous system, or the contractile fibers of the muscle, in such a
way that the muscle is able to contract with more force on later sets. As most of
the strength techniques suggest, reserve this strength training method for the
prime strength movements or the exercises you substitute for them. Follow the
wave training with three sets of four to six reps on assistance exercises.

Because of the high intensity of this program, you shouldn’t train each major lift
or muscle group more than once per week. Therefore, the squat–bench press–
deadlift training split is ideal to use with wave training. See table 9.20 for a
sample wave training deadlift program, set up for a person who can currently
deadlift 405 pounds for one rep and wants to get up to 445 pounds. Follow this
program for no more than eight weeks.
             DeLorme Ascending Strength Pyramid
This program increases weight on each successive set for three sets total until
you are doing the appropriate weight for the rep range you are using. For
example, on set 1 you perform 10 reps with 50 percent of your 10RM. On set 2
you perform 10 reps with 75 percent of your 10RM. On set 3 you perform 10
reps (or as many reps as it takes to reach failure) with the actual 10RM. The first
two sets function as warm-up sets because the weight is relatively light given the
number of reps you have to perform. It is just the last set that can be considered a
working set.

Although this method may seem like little work to many lifters, this one-
working-set scheme may be the reason it works so well to increase strength. It
provides a thorough warm-up and allows only one set to failure. This
corresponds to research from Australia that supports the notion that one set to
failure is superior to no sets to failure as well as more than one set to failure. In
fact, a study that investigated the strength gains after following the DeLorme
ascending strength pyramid or the Oxford descending pyramid (covered in
chapter 6) found that the DeLorme method led to greater strength gains than the
Oxford method.

When using the DeLorme technique, the repetition maximum is not critical,
because many powerlifters use this pyramid method with 3RM, 4RM, 5RM, and
6RM to train for strength. In fact, one way to use this technique is to routinely
change the RM. Because there is only one working set per exercise, this program
works well with a push–pull training split or an upper-and lower-body
powerlifting split. See table 9.21 for a sample DeLorme training program that
follows a typical push–pull training split.
     Programs That Manipulate Rest Periods
When it comes to training for strength, rest periods are pretty standard. Most
lifters rest a full three minutes between sets and rarely veer from this standard.
However, altering rest periods can have a significant impact on strength gains
when properly executed. This section covers strength training programs that
systematically alter the rest periods involved. This can be done by implementing
short rest periods between each rep (as with the rest–pause technique), by
progressively lowering the rest between sets every week (as with one-rep to one-
set method), or by progressively losing rest time between sets because of an
increase in the number of reps performed each week (as found in the density
training technique).

                         Rest–Pause Technique
Rest–pause is a lifting technique that involves stopping during a set, resting for a
short period, and then continuing with the set. Its major advantage is that it
allows for more total reps to be done with a given weight. That’s because it takes
advantage of the muscles’ ability to recover rapidly. In simple terms, it allows
the muscles time to replenish phosphocreatine (PCr)—the same molecule that
creatine supplements boost. With this shot of extra energy, the muscle can
contract more strongly, producing greater force and getting more reps. The
greater the force your muscle can produce and the more reps you can perform,
the greater the stimulus the muscles receive and the greater the gains in strength
that you can expect.

The concept behind rest–pause training for strength gains is not necessarily to
get more total reps or reach a higher state of fatigue but to optimize the force
produced on each rep. To prioritize strength gains with rest–pause, you typically
use a weight that allows you to get only three to five reps (3-to 5RM). The most
common form of rest–pause training is to choose a weight that you can perform
at only about three reps. Do one rep and rack the weight. Rest 15 seconds and
then pump out another rep. Repeat this process until you have completed three to
five reps total. That concludes one rest–pause set. This technique has been
shown to be effective at producing decent strength gains, but it may not be the
most effective.
In the laboratory it was discovered that an even better rest–pause technique for
building strength involved shorter rest periods—about 3 to 5 seconds. Instead of
racking the weight and resting 15 seconds between each rep, you simply hold the
weight and rest for 3 to 5 seconds then complete another rep. Do this for a total
of three reps. Stopping at three reps allows you to do three sets at the same
weight, which maximizes the stimulus the muscle receives. Rest–pause training
can work with any training split. To get appreciable results from rest–pause
training, you will need to use it consistently for four to six weeks.

Table 9.22 gives a sample bench press routine. Do all three sets using this rest–
pause technique and then follow them up with a second exercise for chest (such
as incline bench press or dumbbell bench press) for another three sets of rest–
pause. You will find that you can use considerably more weight than usual on the
second exercise because you will not be as fatigued as you would be with three
regular sets.
                    One-Rep to One-Set Method
This method takes advantage of time by slowly decreasing the time rested
between each exercise until you are doing one continuous set. Doing 10 sets of
one rep with the same weight each set is the same amount of work as one set of
10 reps with that same weight. The difference is that doing the work as a single
set is harder because of the fatigue that sets in—partly from the increasing levels
of lactic acid. If you slowly, over time, reduce the amount of rest between those
10 sets, you will train the muscle to be better at producing the quick energy you
need and to deal with the lactic acid—and this obviously will help the muscles
grow stronger. The best way to go about this is to start with a weight at which
you can do 10 sets of one rep with 90-second rest periods between sets. You then
attempt to shave 15 seconds off of the rest periods with each successive workout.

How this works is simple: Consider that you can lift the weight for 10 reps—just
not 10 reps in a row. See table 9.23 for a sample program. This program can be
used with any training split.
                             Density Training
Density training is a great way to trick your muscles into lifting more weight for
more reps. This is particularly good for increasing strength on body-weight
exercises, such as pull-ups, dips, and push-ups (since you can’t change your
body weight easily), but it can be used for any exercise. Density training begins
by doubling the volume of work you want to accomplish. If your goal is to
complete 12 reps with a certain amount of weight, then you start off with 12 sets
of 2 reps (or 24 total reps) in 12 minutes. So rest is about 50 seconds between
sets. Basically you have 1 minute to complete each set and rest before the next
set. The more reps you do each set, the less rest you are allowed. After this
becomes easy, move to 8 sets of 3 reps in 8 minutes. When this becomes easy,
move to 6 sets of 4 reps in 6 minutes, then 5 sets of 5 reps in 5 minutes, then 4
sets of 6 reps in 4 minutes. When this becomes easy, move to 3 sets of 8 reps in
3 minutes. When you’ve mastered this, you should be able to get 1 set of 12
straight reps. By performing the same overall amount of work (24 reps) and
progressively decreasing the amount of rest time, you are increasing the amount
of work done during a given amount of time or increasing the density of the
work. Density training works because of biochemical adaptations within the
muscle cells during the progression of the program.
Programs That Manipulate Exercise Selection
There are countless exercises that you can use to enhance muscle strength. Using
the proper exercises can make a huge difference in your strength gains. This
section discusses strength training methods that alter the exercises that are used
to increase muscle strength. Some of these techniques focus solely on specific
types of exercises, such as unilateral training and the dumbbell power program,
while others use specific types of exercises in a particular order, such as the
three-step strength method, front-to-back training, and ECO training method.


                           Unilateral Training
Unilateral training refers to training one side of the body at a time. Unlike one-
sided training for building muscle mass (covered in chapter 6), unilateral training
does not separate training days into left-and right-side workouts. Unilateral
training simply uses exercises that are performed with one limb at a time—such
as the one-arm dumbbell bench press, the one-leg squat, and even the one-leg,
one-arm dumbbell deadlift. Although this approach to training is nothing
revolutionary, few powerlifters actually train using unilateral exercises. This is
unfortunate, since research confirms that when you train unilaterally the muscles
are able to produce more force, and more muscle fibers (particularly fast-twitch
muscle fibers) are active. One study comparing unilateral biceps curls to bilateral
(both arms) biceps curls reported that the force produced on bilateral biceps curls
was up to about 20 percent less than the sum of the force produced from the left-
and right-arm unilateral curls. In other words, if you could curl 100 pounds with
a barbell for one rep, you would expect to be able to curl only a 50-pound
dumbbell with each arm for one rep. In reality, you may be able to curl a 60-
pound dumbbell with each arm for one rep. Adding the weight of those
dumbbells together would mean that you could curl a total of 120 pounds, or 20
percent more than with both arms at the same time.

To take advantage of the added strength that unilateral training offers, you
should periodically do one-arm and one-leg exercises. See table 9.25 for a list of
one-arm and one-leg exercises that can be added to a strength training program.
Descriptions of how to perform these exercises correctly are found in part V. A
great way to incorporate these exercises into your current strength training
program is to include two sets of unilateral versions of the strength lifts after you
have completed the working sets of the strength lifts. For assistance exercises, do
two sets of the unilateral version followed by two sets of the bilateral version for
each exercise. See table 9.26 for a sample strength training program that heavily
incorporates unilateral exercises into an upper-and lower-body powerlifting split.
                    Three-Step Strength Method
This training method incorporates dumbbell, barbell, and machine versions of
one exercise in that specific order to enhance muscle strength. While one benefit
of this training method is the variety of exercises, the main benefit stems from
the order in which you do these exercises. The major reason for this has to do
with the stabilizer muscles.

The stabilizer muscles generally lie deep under your major muscle groups (the
prime movers). Though the stabilizers are often much smaller and weaker,
they’re important for securing the joints during various movements. When you
train with equipment that’s fairly unstable—such as dumbbells—the stabilizer
muscles become fatigued much sooner than the muscle group you’re trying to
work because the stabilizers are weaker. When the stabilizers are fatigued, the
brain limits the nervous input to the prime movers in order to prevent injury
from occurring. In other words, the stabilizers limit the amount of force the
prime movers can produce.

One unorthodox way to train that prevents the stabilizers from being the weak
link in your training is to order your exercises in a manner that moves from the
least stable exercise to the most stable. This way, as the stabilizer muscles
fatigue, you change the exercises to ones that require less activity of the
stabilizers. This allows the prime movers to train with heavy weights that are not
limited by the fatigue of the stabilizer muscles. The three-step strength method
follows this order by starting the workout with dumbbell exercises, which
require the most help from the stabilizers because each arm is allowed to move
in all directions that the joints will allow. For leg exercises, one-leg exercises
would take the place of dumbbell exercises. The workout then moves to a barbell
exercise. Because it is a free-weight exercise, you still require some use of
stabilizer muscles. But because these exercises are done bilaterally with both
arms locked in place on the bar (upper-body exercises) or both legs locked in
place on the floor (leg exercises), there is less use of the stabilizers than with
dumbbell or unilateral leg exercises. The last type of exercise on the list is a
machine exercise. This type of exercise requires barely any help from the
stabilizers because the movement of the machine forces your body to follow a
predetermined path that doesn’t permit deviation. Since the machine is designed
to target particular prime movers, the stabilizers are basically not needed.
As an example of a three-step strength method workout for a bench press-
focused workout, you would start with the dumbbell bench press, then move to
the barbell bench press, and finish with the machine bench press. For a squat-
focused workout, you could start with the one-leg squat as the first exercise, then
move to the barbell squat as the second exercise, and finish with the leg press.
Using this training method for a deadlift-focused workout is not ideal but can be
done. For this workout, start with the one-leg, one-arm dumbbell deadlift, then
move to the standard deadlift, and finish with a horizontal leg press machine (but
start the movement from the down position, which mimics the deadlift).

This training method should not take the place of standard strength training
methods that organize the major strength exercises first in the workout. Instead,
the best way to use the three-step strength method is to train with it on a second
workout for that lift later in the week. For instance, you can do a standard bench
press workout early in the week and then do a three-step strength method bench
press workout later in the week. This works well with the squat–bench press–
deadlift training split by adding a three-step strength method workout on
Saturday. An example of this is shown in the workout in table 9.27. Each
exercise should be done for 3 working sets. The amount of weight used and the
reps performed can be cycled to correspond with your training phase.
                       Dumbbell Power Program
This is a basic strength training program that uses only dumbbell exercises.
Training this way is not any more beneficial than using barbells, but it can work
to pull you out of a training slump and get your strength gains climbing again for
several reasons. The first reason is the change. Changing your training with
different exercises, such as those found in the dumbbell power program, can
affect your overall strength by recruiting different muscle fibers that you may
have neglected from doing the usual exercises in your routine. Then there’s the
strength imbalance that most lifters have. Some experience up to a 10 percent
difference between their stronger side and weaker side. Unilateral training with
dumbbells forces the weaker side to gain strength since that side must lift the
dumbbell on its own.

Another benefit of dumbbells is that they can improve the strength of your
stabilizer muscles. This can actually enhance overall muscle strength while
reducing the risk of injury to your joints. Dumbbell strength training is also great
for those who train at home. Dumbbells take up little room, and you can perform
a variety of exercises in a minimal amount of space. These exercises are also
great for those with shoulder, elbow, or wrist injuries because they allow a freer
ROM compared to the ROM allowed with barbells.

The dumbbell power program is a six-week program that involves many
multijoint and multimovement exercises that increase overall body strength. See
table 9.28 for the outline of the program. Detailed descriptions on how to
perform these exercises can be found in part V. Each workout is done three days
per week—usually Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. If you want, you can
include one extra training day that hits the squat, bench press, and deadlift. In
weeks 1 and 2, you’ll train with three sets of 10 to 12 reps with 90 seconds of
rest between sets. During weeks 3 and 4, the weight increases and the reps drop
to six to eight per set. Increase the rest to two minutes between sets. For the final
two weeks (weeks 5 and 6), you increase the weight again and drop the reps to
four to six per set. Increase the rest periods again to three minutes between sets
to allow ample recovery time. The abdominal and core exercises, however,
increase in reps. For these, the weight should stay the same or even increase over
the six weeks, and rest should be constant at one minute between sets.
                         Front-to-Back Training
This training method involves training opposing muscle groups and exercise
movements to increase muscle strength. With this method, you train exercises
that are opposing movements and train opposing muscle groups back to back.
That is, you do one set of the first exercise and follow it with one set of an
exercise that is the opposite movement of that first exercise. This is similar to
superset training with a longer rest period allowed between the opposing
exercises. For example, during front-to-back training you will train the bench
press and barbell row together.

The advantage of training opposing muscle groups back to back is that you’ll be
stronger in the second exercise. Research has found that a muscle will be
stronger if preceded immediately by a contraction of its antagonist, or opposing
muscle group. For example, when you do a superset of barbell row and bench
press in that order, you’ll be stronger on the bench press—as long as you don’t
train to failure on the row. The reason for this phenomenon is that, to some
degree, the agonist muscle is limited by its antagonist. When bench-pressing
using straight sets, for example, the back muscles inhibit the contraction of the
pectoral muscles to a certain extent. Doing a set of rows shortly before benching,
however, lessens this inhibitory effect, allowing your pecs to contract more
forcefully.

The front-to-back training routine presented in table 9.29 uses an upper-and
lower-body training split for a total of four workouts per week. The upper-body
workout is done on Mondays and Thursdays, and the lower-body workouts are
done on Tuesdays and Fridays. On the Thursday upper-body workout, you
should switch the order of the exercise pair on all exercises except the bench
press. The Tuesday lower-body workout focuses on the squat, and the Friday
lower-body workout focuses on the deadlift. You will do five sets of each
exercise pair. The first exercise should be done for no more than five reps with a
weight that is about 50 to 70 percent RM (a weight that allows you to complete
about 12 to 20 reps) for that exercise. The key is doing these reps explosively
and not fatiguing the muscles. Rest no more than 60 seconds between exercises
and do four to six reps on the second exercise. Normally that would be a weight
that is about 85 to 90 percent RM. However, the additional strength you get from
the antagonist exercise may allow you to complete four to six reps with up to 95
percent RM. After completing the fifth set of the second exercise, do one set to
failure of the first exercise with a weight that normally allows you to complete
about 8 to 10 reps. Follow this program for no more than six weeks before
cycling back to standard straight-set training.
                         ECO Training Method
This method of training incorporates three different types of exercises that all
offer a distinct benefit to build strength. The acronym ECO stands for explosive
exercise, closed-chain exercise, open-chain exercise. Explosive exercises are
plyometric, or ballistic-type movements (discussed earlier in ballistic strength
training), such as the squat jump and bench press throw. Closed-chain exercises
are those where your hands or feet remain stationary and your body moves, such
as squats, push-ups, and pull-ups. Open-chain exercises are those where the
resistance is in your hands or at your feet, such as leg extensions and most
dumbbell upper-body exercises. The ECO workout progresses in that exact order
—the explosive exercise is done first, followed by the closed-chain exercise, and
finishing with the open-chain exercise.

You must do the explosive exercises first while the muscle fibers are fresh. If the
muscle fibers are fatigued when you do them, they won’t be able to contract as
quickly and explosively. In addition, because these moves are performed with
such quick movements, there could be a higher risk of injury if you are fatigued.
Explosive moves target the fast-twitch muscle fibers. Gaining explosive strength
or power from these exercises translates to greater strength on other exercises,
such as the squat and bench press. You will do no more than three reps on the
explosive exercises. The point is to be explosive on all three sets of three reps,
not to tire the muscle. You will use a very light weight (just your body weight or
a weight with which you can perform about 25 to 30 normal reps on the exercise,
or about 30 to 50 percent RM).
The closed-chain exercises force your body to move while your hands or feet are
stationary. These types of exercises are great for building strength in the muscle
you are training. They also develop functional strength because they require
balance and the use of stabilizers to move your body. Because the only true
closed-chain chest exercise is the push-up, the bench press is substituted in this
ECO program. The problem with the push-up is that it’s difficult to increase the
resistance to fall in the proper rep range of four to six. If you are willing,
however, you can do weighted push-ups by having someone sit on your back or
load plates on your back, or you can do push-ups with the bar of a Smith
machine loaded on your back.

An open-chain exercise is anything that involves holding the weight in your
hands (dumbbell fly) or having the weight at your feet (leg extension). In the
ECO program closed-chain exercises are used as isolation exercises to focus the
force onto the muscle of interest for enhancing muscle growth. For the open-
chain exercises, perform 8 to 10 reps per set.

The best split to use with the ECO program is the upper-and lower-body training
split as shown in table 9.30. Follow the program for four weeks and then return
to your standard form of training.
        Programs That Manipulate Training
                   Frequency
This section covers strength training methods that modify the frequency of
training. There are only two programs covered here because few lifters interested
in training for strength view training frequency as an important variable to cycle
in an effort to increase muscle strength. However, changing the frequency of
your training can have a dramatic effect on gains in muscle strength. The
overreaching method and the up-and-down strength method are two programs
that are effective at enhancing strength by manipulating the frequency of
training.
                          Overreaching Method
This program actually causes you to overtrain in an effort to increase strength.
The program design is based on research investigating overtraining in athletes.
But the concept is not all that new. It originated from training principles from the
Eastern Bloc countries. Overreaching is basically overtraining without suffering
from the negative effects of overtraining. The trick is backing off at the right
time. The difference between overtraining and overreaching is mainly time.
Overtraining is a more chronic situation. It’s not something that can just happen
in a couple of days; it may take two to four weeks of training too heavily or too
long to become truly overtrained. By then hormonal perturbations usually have
surfaced and so will the classic signs: fatigue, loss of appetite, lack of strength,
muscle loss, insomnia, and depression.

Overreaching is similar to overtraining in that the training is the same. The
difference is that overreaching is for a short period and ends before the
catastrophic changes in your body’s physiology have taken place. In other
words, overreaching is overtraining before the overtrained state is reached. For
four weeks you will train all muscle groups five days per week. See table 9.31
for the outline of the overreaching training split. You will do three sets per
exercise; each week the weight increases and the reps decrease. The exception is
the Friday workout, where you train using maximal effort (up to 100 percent
RM) on the squat, bench press, and deadlift. At the end of the four weeks, you
back off on the training frequency as well as the weight and slow it down to
training each muscle group just once per week with a squat–bench press–deadlift
training split. During this back-off phase your strength will increase
dramatically. In fact, in the study that the overreaching method is based on,
researchers discovered that after two weeks on the back-off phase, the trained
lifters had increases in 1RM strength of more than 10 percent on both the bench
press and squat.
                 Up-and-Down Strength Program
This six-week strength training program cycles the training frequency every
week by switching up training splits. The program, shown in table 9.32, starts
with a whole-body strength training split, which works each muscle group three
times per week. The second week switches to a push–pull training split, which
trains each muscle group twice per week. The third week uses a squat–bench
press–deadlift training split, which trains each muscle group once per week. At
the fourth week the cycle starts all over but the reps change from about six to
eight per set or 80 percent RM for the major strength lifts to two or three reps or
95 percent RM for the major strength lifts. This program works to increase
strength by gradually increasing the recovery time the muscles receive each
week.
            Chapter 10
Training Cycles for Gaining Maximal
              Strength
The fundamentals of strength training covered in part I will help you understand
how to design effective strength training programs. This chapter is designed to
help you take the information you have learned from chapter 8 (basic program
design for training programs that build maximal strength) and chapter 9
(advanced training techniques) and put it together to build a long-term training
program that works to continually build strength.

This chapter starts by teaching you how to test your 1RM. Regardless of your
training level, you need to assess your strength level accurately for best results
from your training. The first training program offered in this chapter is a
beginner program. If you have little experience in strength training, this program
will enable you to take on the basic strength programs that are most effective for
gaining strength. Once you have followed a strength training program
consistently for at least six months, you are ready to take on an effective
program based on the splits discussed in chapter 8. If you are at the intermediate
level, these programs use the percentage method of training. This is a training
system that gradually increases the weight used by a percentage of the 1RM.

Advanced lifters, those with over a year of strength training experience, can
begin using the methods and techniques covered in chapter 9. One cycle found in
the following section is an advanced program that alters these techniques
throughout the different phases. Finally, if you are interested in increasing your
strength in one lift, you can refer to the sections that focus on just one lift.


           Testing One-Repetition Maximum
Regardless of where they are starting from, all lifters interested in training to
build maximal strength have one goal in common—more strength! With the
exception of powerlifters, who commonly test their 1RM strength in
competition, most lifters do not routinely test their strength by maxing out.
Maxing out, a slang term, means to test your strength by seeing how much
weight you can lift for one ultimate rep on an exercise (usually on the three
strength moves: bench press, squat, and deadlift). Anyone who is interested in
developing muscle strength needs to routinely test 1RM strength on the bench
press, squat, and deadlift.

Assessing your strength on the bench press, squat, and deadlift is important for
several reasons. Because the bench press represents upper-body strength, the
squat represents lower-body strength, and the deadlift represents whole-body
strength, knowing your maximal strength on each of these lifts will give you an
indication of your overall body strength as well as indicate any strength
imbalances you may have. Norms have been established that indicate how strong
a person should be on each of these lifts. For strength norms relative to body
weight, refer to table 10.1. Testing your 1RM on the bench press, squat, and
deadlift and comparing your relative strength on each to the established norms
will indicate how your strength levels compare to the strength levels of others.
You can do this by dividing your 1RM in pounds on each lift by your body
weight in pounds. For example, if your bench press 1RM is 300 pounds and you
weigh 150 pounds (68 kilograms), your relative strength on the bench press is 2.
The Balanced Strength box provides a ratio of squat to deadlift to bench press
strength. Comparing your own 1RM strength ratios of these three lifts can
indicate whether you have balanced strength or whether you are particularly
weak or strong on a particular lift. Knowing whether you have an imbalance can
help you tailor your training to work toward improving the weaker lifts.
                       Balanced Strength
Here I list the suggested ratio of bench press to squat to deadlift 1RM
weight. This can be used to determine whether your upper-body, lower-
body, and overall strength are balanced. Having a ratio on a lift that is
much higher or lower than the suggested ratios would indicate areas in
which you should work on bringing your strength up to par with the
others.

A balanced ratio of bench to squat to deadlift is 1:1.5:1.5.*
    For example, if your bench press is 300 pounds, your squat is 450
    pounds, and your deadlift is 425 pounds (300:450:425), your ratio would
    be 1:1.5:1.4.

    This would suggest your strength in these three lifts is balanced.

    If your bench press is 300 pounds, your squat is 700 pounds, and your
    deadlift is 650 pounds (300:700:650), your ratio would be 1:2.33:2.17.

    This would suggest your strength on the bench press is well below your
    squat and deadlift strength. This means your training should focus on
    bringing up your bench press and upper-body strength.
      *In practice the weight for the deadlift tends to be slightly less than the weight for the squat.



Another important reason to assess your 1RM strength on the bench press, squat,
and deadlift is to determine the training weights that will correspond to each
phase of your strength training program. When training for strength, you will
train using a percentage of your 1RM on the major lifts—such as 85 percent of
the 1RM or 85 percent RM. The only way to know how much weight you should
train with is to know how much your 1RM is. For example, if your current 1RM
on the squat is 400 pounds and you are in a training phase that requires 85
percent RM, then you should train with 340 pounds on the squat. This requires
frequent retesting because your strength will increase while you are training with
effective strength programs. You should plan on testing your 1RM about once
every four to six weeks to keep your training weights accurate with your current
level of strength.

Last and most obvious, it’s important to test your 1RM strength to assess the
effectiveness of each program you use in your strength training regimen.
Knowing your 1RM for the bench press, squat, and deadlift (or any other
exercise you want to increase your strength on) before you start a program and
after you finish it is the only way to determine how effective a strength training
program is and whether you should consider using the same program in the
future.

To test your maximal strength on an exercise, you must have a capable spotter to
assist you, because to determine a true 1RM, you must reach muscle failure. The
first step to testing your 1RM is to do several light warm-up sets starting with
the bar itself and gradually move up in weight over those several sets until you
are close to your true 1RM weight. Rest three minutes after your final warm-up
before testing your 1RM. Estimate a conservative 1RM weight and try it for one
rep. Rest three to four minutes before making another attempt. If you failed on
the second attempt, subtract 5 to 10 pounds and try again. If you were successful
on the attempt, add 5 to 10 pounds and try another attempt. Keep doing this,
resting three to four minutes between sets until you fail an attempt. The weight
you lifted on the prior set is your true 1RM.

Although not considered nearly as accurate, it is possible to estimate your 1RM
without doing a true 1RM test. There are several equations that you can use to
estimate 1RM based on how many reps you can complete with a certain amount
of weight. This is a good option if you have an injury that could be worsened by
training with extremely heavy weight or if you want to avoid doing a true 1RM
for whatever reason. The most commonly used equation is the Epley formula,
also known as the Nebraska formula:

             1RM = [1 + (0.0333 × reps completed)] × weight lifted

Using this equation, if you completed 10 reps on the bench press with 225
pounds, then

                    1RM = [1 + (0.0333 × 10)] × 225 pounds

                          1RM = 1.333 × 225 pounds

                               1RM = 300 pounds

After estimating your 1RM with the Nebraska formula, use that weight to
determine your relative strength, your training weight, or how much progress
you have made with a particular strength program.


        Beginner Overall Strength Program
If you have more than six months of consistent lifting experience, you can take
on the majority of basic strength training programs that are designed to build
maximal strength. The reason is that most programs for developing maximal
strength start with lighter weight and higher reps and gradually increase the
weight and decrease the reps performed. This systematic progression can prepare
you to hoist heavy weights. However, if you have less than six months of
experience, you are a special case because of the immaturity of your nervous
system in regard to the specific exercises that you perform in your training
regimen. Any time the body learns a new movement pattern—such as the barbell
squat—it requires time for nerve connections to be strengthened and muscle
fiber contractions to be synchronized. These adaptations of the nervous system
can have a dramatic effect on strength gains in a short period of time. It is these
adaptations that make up the majority of the strength gains that beginners make.
Therefore, you should design a beginner strength training program to enhance
these adaptations.

To enhance the neural adaptations that you need as a beginning lifter, this
program emphasizes repetition—that is in the number of reps performed per set
and the frequency of training. The training split used is a whole-body strength
training split done on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, or any three days per
week allowing one full day of rest between workouts (see table 10.2). In each
workout a different strength exercise is emphasized and performed as the first
exercise of the workout. Training the same exercises three times per week helps
the nervous system to “learn” the movement patterns of the exercise,
strengthening the nerve connections that are required. During the first three
months of the program, the assistance exercises stay the same for every workout
(except for abdominal and core exercises). In the last three months, the
assistance exercises are switched up in each workout to provide better variety in
an effort to stimulate different muscle fibers, which may help to enhance
strength on the three lifts.
The repetitions start out very high (20 per set for the first four weeks) and
progressively drop every four weeks as the weight increases. This first four-
week phase starts with weights equal to 55 percent RM on most lifts. This is a
great starting weight if you are unaccustomed to doing particular exercises. The
high reps further enhance the nerve connections and synchronicity of muscle
fiber contractions that you need to develop to perform the exercises with correct
form and maximal force. Sets start out at three per exercise for all exercises for
the first three months. During the fourth and fifth months, you will perform all
exercises for four sets. Then in the last month, you will bump up the sets to five
on the three major lifts—but just on the workout in which you perform that
exercise first. In the other workouts, sets remain at four. During the second phase
the weight increases to 65 percent RM and reps drop to 15 per set. The third
phase increases weight to 70 percent RM and drops reps to 12 per set. In phase
4, weight increases to 75 percent RM and reps are 10 per set. Phase 5 uses
weights that are 80 percent RM for reps of 8 per set. In the final four weeks,
weights are increased to 85 percent RM as reps drop down to 6 per set.

During this program 1RM testing should take place during the last week of each
phase. Each of the three exercises will be tested on the workout in which you
perform them first. After testing for the 1RM on that exercise, finish with three
sets of that exercise with the prescribed weight and rep scheme for that phase. At
the end of this six-month program, you are ready to progress to any of the other
training programs discussed in this chapter. However, you should pick up with
the intermediate strength training cycles.


      Intermediate Strength Training Cycles
Once you have been training consistently for more than six months, you are
ready to take on most of the basic strength programs that follow a sound
progression of increases in weight. Most strength programs follow some form of
gradually increasing the percent RM used for training. This method is known as
the percentage method of training and is the most commonly used method for
increasing strength. The major differences between most training programs for
developing strength involve the training split, the length of the program, the
starting percent RM, and the finishing percent RM. The three training cycles that
follow do not provide exercise choices. They list only the time line, the number
of sets per exercise, the number of reps per set, the working weight (as percent
RM), and the rest allowed between sets. Choose any training split provided in
chapter 8 (to provide exercise choices and order as well as workouts per week)
and apply it to these cycles.


Small-Step Cycle
You can use this 20-week basic periodized scheme with any training split. It
follows the classical periodization format but increases the weight in very small
increments each week—usually just 2 to 3 percent of the 1RM. See table 10.3
for the details of the small-step cycle. Depending on the weight of your 1RM,
these increments may be as small as 2.5 pounds (the smallest increment
available with weight plates) or as high as 25 pounds (for elite powerlifters with
lifts up to 800 pounds). This constant and small increase in weight used each
week is often referred to as microloading . It is believed that constantly
challenging the muscle with progressively heavier weights forces the muscles to
adapt by increasing their capacity to produce force (that is, muscle strength).
This follows the principle of progressive overload. In addition to the prescribed
percent RM used each week, this cycle has scheduled retesting of the 1RM. This
allows for fine-tuning of the percent RM as the 1RM will increase over the
course of the training cycle.
Countdown Cycle
Although all the basic strength training programs have some form of gradual
progression where the reps performed at each workout decrease over time, the
countdown cycle uses a corresponding system that matches sets, reps, and weeks
that each phase is followed in a 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 countdown progression. See table
10.4 for the weekly progression of the countdown cycle. To expand on this, the
first phase lasts six weeks and uses six sets of six reps for each exercise. The
next phase lasts five weeks and uses five sets of five reps. This pattern continues
with each phase dropping one week, one set, and one rep until the final week,
where one set of one maximal rep is performed for each exercise. As with all the
basic percentage method strength programs, this works well with any split
discussed in chapter 8.
9 to 5 Cycle
This training cycle is simple in that it uses two rep ranges—nine reps per set and
five reps per set. This is great for those who like to keep rep ranges fairly
constant. However, training weights do change each week over the 15-week
program while the reps are kept constant throughout each of the two phases. As
the weight increases, the number of sets decreases and rest between sets
increases. See table 10.5 for the specifics of the 9 to 5 cycle. Weight increments
are small, similar to the small-step cycle, but this one stops at 85 percent and
doesn’t go higher. Many believe that going much higher isn’t necessary for
building maximal strength.
One-Year-Plus Intermediate Program
If you are an intermediate lifter you should consider following the previous
cycles in the order presented—starting with the small-step cycle, following with
the countdown cycle, and finishing with the 9 to 5 cycle. This will carry you
through over 55 weeks—just over a solid year—of well-planned strength
training. With the conclusion of this year plan you will be ready to progress into
more advanced training cycles. One great advanced training cycle to follow the 9
to 5 cycle that concludes the year of intermediate training cycles is the 85-plus
strength cycle found in the advanced training cycles section that follows. See
table 10.6 for a sample training cycle progression that puts you in the rank of
advanced weightlifter.
         Advanced Strength Training Cycles
The cycles that follow are advanced in the sense that they require greater skill
and training experience in order to be used safely and properly. These programs
are considered advanced for several reasons—they may start off at a heavier
weight or they may require the use of advanced techniques. This does not imply
that the training cycles covered in the basic strength training cycles are not
useful for advanced weightlifters. Those programs may be basic in their
progression; however, many elite competitive powerlifters use them. These
advanced programs are designed for the advanced trainer who has a more
difficult time continuing to make large strength gains, since basic programs may
not always do the trick.


85-Plus Strength Cycle
Unlike the intermediate programs, which all start with very light weight in the 50
to 60 percent RM range, this program starts off at 85 percent RM and
progressively builds up to 95 percent RM. This is depicted in table 10.7. It also
increases the reps as time progresses with each percent RM. This is good for
more advanced trainers or as a second leg to a previous program that started with
a lighter phase. The 9 to 5 cycle, for instance, is a good cycle to use before this
cycle. Another advanced technique that this cycle uses is negative-rep training.
However, instead of doing it at the beginning of the working sets for bench press
and squat, you would do these as the final working set for each major lift on
working days.
Advanced Six Cycle
For some advanced weightlifters, strength gains no longer come easily. After all,
the longer you train, the stronger you get; the stronger you get, the harder it is to
get stronger. This is because trained lifters with greater strength are close to
reaching the height of their genetic strength ceiling. This advanced program is
designed to encourage strength gains in even the most seasoned lifter. In each of
the six phases, the cycle uses an advanced training technique to encourage
strength gains. The constant cycling of weight and reps, along with the
specialized training techniques, prevents stagnation and promotes continual
strength gains throughout the eight-month cycle.

This cycle uses a squat–bench press–deadlift training split that is meshed with a
push–pull training split. That is, the workouts are divided into three separate
workouts—squat, bench press, and deadlift with upper-body pushing exercises
(shoulders and triceps exercises) done with the bench press day and the upper-
body pulling exercises (back and biceps exercises) done with the deadlift day.
For variety, each phase alters the order of the training split. See table 10.8,
Advanced Six, for details.

During the first phase (weeks 1 to 5), the training technique used is density
training. This will increase the amount of weight you can perform 10 reps with
on the squat, bench press, and deadlift. This will carry over into greater strength
on the 1RM for each of these lifts as well. This will be apparent when you test
your 1RM in week 6. That is the only gym workout you will do in week 6.

In phase 2 (weeks 7 to 9), the training days are reorganized so that the deadlift
day is first and the squat day is last. The bench press workout still is left in the
middle to separate the two workouts that both use lower-body muscles to allow
for better recovery. You will do working sets with 80 percent RM—however, this
will be heavier than you could previously lift because of the boost in strength
from the density training. The technique for this phase is forced-rep training.
This is a mass-training technique covered in chapter 6. The reason it is included
here in a strength cycle is to encourage some growth in muscle fibers—which
can lend itself to greater force production and therefore muscle strength. In
addition, the procedure of forcing extra reps can lead to direct increases in
muscle strength. This phase lasts just three weeks because of the high intensity
of the forced-rep training.

Phase 3 (weeks 11 to 17) starts off using about 80 to 85 percent RM or a weight
you can do for four sets of six reps. This will kick off the 5 percent method that
will carry this phase through the next seven weeks. Use the 5 percent method for
each major lift and one assistance exercise that mimics the lift. In phase 4
(weeks 19 to 22) you will use a static contraction technique that calls on
potentiation to enhance muscle strength on the second set. You will do working
sets with 90 percent RM. Phase 5 (weeks 24 to 27) uses another potentiation
technique known to boost your power on the three lifts. For each strength
exercise (squat, deadlift, and bench press), you will perform one rep with 95
percent of your 1RM weight as quickly as possible. Rest for three minutes and
downshift to 50 percent of your 1RM weight and perform five reps as
explosively as possible. Repeat this three times to develop explosive strength.
The final phase is yet another potentiation program. This is basically the reverse
of the technique of the previous phase because it uses explosive movements to
enhance maximal strength. At the climax of this program your 1RM on all three
moves will be dramatically enhanced. Follow this final phase with one or two
weeks of active rest before starting the cycle over or moving on to a new
strength training cycle.
                        Lift-Specific Cycles
Training to build overall strength should be every weightlifter’s major goal.
However, after you have a strong base of overall strength from lifting for a good
while, you may want to build up strength in certain lifts. This may be due to an
imbalance of strength in a certain area. Or you may just have an affinity for a
particular lift and want to excel at it. This is often common with the bench press.
The following programs are designed to build up your strength in one lift and
only one lift. However, this does not mean that you shouldn’t work on increasing
your strength in the other lifts. These programs emphasize the bench press,
squat, or deadlift. However, they are designed to fit in with regular training
splits. One way to use these cycles is to alternate the three of them so that you
emphasize bench press strength at one phase in your training cycle, squat
strength in another, and deadlift strength in another before cycling back to bench
press-focused training.


Bench Press Booster Cycle
This 10-week cycle involves using an upper-and lower-body split so that you can
train chest twice each week (once on Monday with a heavy day and once on
Thursday with a light day of bench press work). See table 10.9, Big Bench
Routine, for details. On the heavy chest day, all you do is bench press. Weight
increases and therefore repetitions decrease every three weeks until you reach
the last week where you max out with your new record weight. Allow three to
five minutes of rest between sets on your heavy bench day to keep your strength
up. On the light chest day you do the bench press along with the other upper-
body assistance exercises. In this workout, you’ll perform light bench presses as
well as dumbbell bench presses (incline or flat) and flys (incline or flat). Rotate
the incline and flat version of these exercises so that when you do incline
dumbbell presses, you follow with flat flys and vice versa. Allow two to three
minutes of rest between sets on the light chest day.

Finish the chest workout with power push-ups to develop explosive power that
will help you throw up more weight on the bench press. This light day is
important because it keeps the muscle from losing its memory of how strong it
was at the previous training session, enhances the blood circulation in the areas
that are important to the bench, keeps your muscle size up, and reinforces your
groove—that unique lifting path that you’ll discover to be the best way to push
the bar up to completion. Follow the light chest routine with one exercise for
shoulders, back, triceps, and biceps.

Follow this routine for 9 weeks. On the 10th week, you max out on your
specified heavy chest day. You’ll be amazed at your newfound strength. Do no
other lifting this week; you should be at your peak. After you peak, take a period
of active recovery in which you perform some form of light exercise. Try other
activities that involve both upper-and lower-body movements such as swimming,
racket sports, or rock-wall climbing.
Squat-Building Cycle
This six-week squat program is a modified version of what is known as the
Russian squat routine. It will increase your squat weight 5 to 10 percent in just
six weeks. However, it does require you to squat for three days per week (see
table 10.10). That makes the squat–bench press–deadlift training split the best
split to use with this program, but with one modification: You will squat first on
all three workout days. On Monday do a full squat workout with just two extra
assistance exercises for quads (the leg press and leg extension) as well as one
calf exercise. On Wednesday you will perform just the prescribed number of
squats and no other leg work before your bench press workout. On Friday you
will do the same thing before your deadlift workout. Some lifters opt to train
their squats in the morning on Wednesdays and Fridays and their bench presses
and deadlifts in the evening. This can help prevent the fatigue that may hinder
your other lifts after performing several sets of squats.

The program starts at 80 percent RM and cycles over the 18-day program to
reach 100 percent by the 16th workout. Then it drops back to 80 percent for the
17th workout to give the legs a rest before the 18th workout, where you will test
your 1RM with at least 105 percent of your original 1RM before this program.
Deadlift Raising Cycle
This 10-week program is effective for boosting strength in the deadlift in even
the most experienced lifters. In fact, this program is similar to one used by many
elite deadlifters, including Mark Phillipi. This program works well with a squat–
bench press–deadlift training split, as long as you do the deadlift workout first in
the week and the squat workout last (see table 10.11). It consistently uses just
one set of heavy weight for very low reps (one or two) as the first working set of
each workout. Over the 10 weeks the weight for this set moves from 75 percent
to 100 percent. Following the heavy set are several sets of light deadlifts done
explosively. This builds up the power you will need to explode the weight off the
floor at the start of the deadlift. The first four weeks use a circuit program for the
assistance exercises. This helps to condition the muscles to prevent fatigue. The
last six weeks use straight sets for all assistance exercises.
                  Part IV
       Training for Maximal Fat Loss




Strength training for fat loss does not have to be all that much different from
strength training for muscle mass or for maximal strength. In fact, many of the
programs in this section actually maximize fat loss while increasing muscle mass
and increasing muscle strength. The real key to fat loss comes from the cardio
techniques you employ (covered in chapter 12) and the diet you follow (covered
in chapter 28). That being said, you can use a few tricks with your strength
training to enhance fat loss, such as manipulating rest periods, weight and reps
used, and exercises selected.

Chapter 11 covers the basics of creating strength training programs for
maximizing fat loss. This chapter covers the training variables that you want to
manipulate and the reasons for doing so to enhance fat loss through strength
training.

Chapter 12 gets into various cardio techniques to use along with a strength
training program. It discusses the science behind high-intensity interval training
(HIIT) and covers several HIIT techniques and tips for including them in your
overall training program.

Chapter 13 concludes this section with specific training programs that maximize
fat loss. This chapter covers programs for beginners as well as those for
intermediate and advanced lifters.
                 Chapter 11
      Tactics for Maximizing Fat Loss
Unless you are a strength athlete with the goal of lifting as much weight as
possible, then your pursuit for a fitter, more muscular, and stronger physique
should not be just about building total mass but about building lean muscle.
After all, if the muscle that you have spent so much effort building is not readily
visible, then what’s the point of all that hard work? Sure, weight training has
many health benefits and will improve your quality of life, but those are all nice
fringe benefits of the main reason you weight train—to look better. And looking
better makes you feel better.

The best way to enhance fat loss is with a proper combination of weight training
and cardio along with diet. Techniques to employ in weight training and cardio
workouts are covered later in this chapter. Nutrition advice for promoting fat loss
is covered in chapter 28.


 Strength Training Techniques That Enhance
                  Fat Loss
The very act of weightlifting can affect fat loss by increasing both the number of
calories your body burns during the workout and how many calories your body
burns after the workout is long over. And it can now be argued that the body of
someone who weight trains is better equipped at burning more fat throughout the
day and storing less fat. Yet years of research have proven that manipulating
certain acute training variables can have an even bigger impact on the calories
burned during workouts and the calories burned the rest of the day after the
workout is over.

Exercise Selection
While a variety of exercises is always best, there are certain types of exercises
that you will want to include in workouts to aid in fat loss. Research suggests
that using multijoint, free-weight exercises, such as the squat, bench press,
shoulder press, and bent-over row, will maximize the number of calories burned
more than machine exercises or single-joint isolation exercises. This is likely
because multijoint exercises use more muscle groups, such as those that assist
the target muscle and stabilizer muscles, which stabilize the joints involved. And
the more muscles you use, the more calories you burn. In fact, one study found
that when participants did the barbell squat, they burned 50 percent more
calories than when they did the leg press (Tower et al. 2005).

Resistance and Rep Range
The weight you train with and the number of reps you complete can have a big
impact on your calorie burn. To burn more calories during the workout, higher
reps do the trick. College of New Jersey researchers found that when participants
used a weight that allowed them to complete 10 reps on the bench press, they
burned about 10 percent more calories than when they used a weight that limited
them to 5 reps (Ratamess et al. 2007). The more reps you do, the more calories
you burn. On the flip side of that, several studies have shown that while using
heavier weight for fewer reps burns fewer calories during the workout, it burns
more calories when the workout is over and you go about the rest of your day. In
fact, research has shown that when you work out with heavy weights that limit
you to 6 reps per set, the boost in your metabolic rate for 2 days after the
workout more than doubles the boost you get when you work out with light
weight that allows you to complete 12 reps per set (Borshein and Bahr 2003). So
some combination of both heavy weight for low reps and light weight for high
reps is the best way to take advantage of both benefits. This can be achieved by
either using both low and high rep ranges in each workout or periodizing the rep
ranges of the program.

Volume
The total number of sets you do for each muscle group and per workout
(volume) will affect the number of calories you burn in the workout. The more
sets you perform, the more work you are doing, and the more calories you end
up burning. So increasing total volume of workouts is not only a strategy that
can help to increase muscle growth, as discussed in chapter 2, but it can also
increase the number of calories burned. As a general rule, keeping workouts to a
minimum of 20 sets and ideally closer to 30 or more sets per workout can lead to
significantly greater fat loss than workouts that are under 20 sets.

Rep Speed
A fourth variable to consider is the speed of the reps that you perform. Research
has shown that doing reps in a fast and explosive manner can increase the
number of calories you burn both during and after the workout. Researchers
from Ball State University had weight-trained males do a squat exercise using 60
percent of their one-rep max at a normal pace (2 seconds on the positive part of
the rep and 2 seconds on the negative part of the rep) or a very fast pace (1
second on the positive part of the rep and 2 seconds on the negative part of the
rep). For both workouts, they did 4 sets of 8 reps, during which they were
hooked up to a metabolic instrument to measure the number of calories they
burned. The researchers discovered that when the participants did the 4 sets of
squats with fast reps, they burned over 11 percent more calories during the
workout and over 5 percent more calories at rest after the workout compared to
when they used slower reps (Mazzetti et al. 2007).

While you don’t want to do every exercise with fast and explosive reps, a better
plan is to start your workouts with one exercise for each muscle group done in
an explosive manner. For example, for chest you can start the workout with three
or four sets of power push-ups or Smith machine bench press throws. This will
help you build muscle power in the chest, which can help you gain muscle
strength as you burn fat. And since ballistic exercises like this are done with
light weight, they serve as a good warm-up to the heavier working sets that will
follow, such as the bench press.

Rest
One of the more critical variables for increasing fat loss is the rest period you
allow between sets. Generally speaking, the less rest you allow, the greater the
number of calories you burn in a workout.

Research from the College of New Jersey has shown that if you cut your rest
periods from the standard 3 minutes between sets to just 30 seconds between
sets, you can increase the number of calories you burn during the workout by
over 50 percent (Ratamess et al. 2007). These shorter rest periods, compared to
longer rest periods, also lead to a bigger increase in the metabolic rate boost that
follows the workout. Research also shows a similar response to supersets, which
basically eliminates any rest periods between sets. This is covered in more detail
in the following section.

While you should keep rest periods between sets to a minimum, the one time to
hold the rest period between sets to at least one minute, if not longer, is when
using the cardio technique of cardioacceleration, where instead of truly resting
between sets you do cardio between sets. To learn more about
cardioacceleration, see chapter 12.

Intensity Techniques
Another thing to consider regarding weight training for maximizing fat loss is
the use of intensity techniques that allow you to take sets past the point of
normal muscle failure. For example, with forced reps the assistance from a
partner helps you go past muscle failure by continuing to do more reps than you
would be able to complete on your own. Research shows that this technique
leads to a higher increase in growth hormone levels than by simply ending the
set at muscle failure (Ahtiainen et al. 2003). Since growth hormone (GH)
increases lipolysis, the release of fat from the fat cells, having higher GH levels
can lead to more fat being freed up from the fat cells so that it can be burned
away as fuel during the workout and after.

One study on collegiate football players found that those following a high-
intensity weight program, which consisted of just one set per exercise done for 6
to 10 reps per exercise done to failure along with forced reps and finally a static
contraction for several seconds, lost more body fat over 10 weeks than those
using a lower-intensity program, which consisted of three sets of 6 to 10 reps per
exercise taken to just muscle failure (Fincher 2004).

Using the intensity technique, supersets also can enhance calorie burning and
therefore fat loss. One study from Syracuse University reported that participants
supersetting chest and back, biceps and triceps, and quads and hamstrings
increased the number of calories burned during the workout and the hour after
the workout by 35 percent more than those performing the same chest and back
exercises as straight sets (Kelleher et al. 2010). While this may be because an
athlete uses more muscle fibers by supersetting different muscle groups, the fact
that rest periods between supersets are minimal is likely to be a big factor as
well. The influence that rest periods have between sets is discussed earlier in this
chapter. This would likely mean that using techniques such as tri-sets and giant
sets, in which you train three and four or more exercises, respectively, back to
back, would provide a similar effect, if not an even bigger one.

Training Frequency
How often you train muscle groups can also have an impact on fat loss. The
most obvious reason for this is that when you train muscle groups more
frequently you tend to train more often during the week. More workouts during
the week equate to more total calories burned throughout the weeks.

Another reason more frequent workouts lead to greater fat loss is that when you
train muscle groups more frequently, you need to train more muscle groups per
workout. This means that you have more muscle tissue that is recovering after
the workout is over. After workouts your body is in a state known as oxygen
debt. That means it needs more oxygen to replenish ATP and phosphocreatine
stores. It needs that oxygen to burn more fuel (calories) to recover from the
workout. With more muscle fibers needed to recover, the calorie burn stays
higher for longer.


                                 Summary
The way in which you design your weight training program can significantly
affect fat loss. Generally speaking, programs that use many multijoint
movements, incorporate explosive and ballistic training exercises, use heavy
weight for fewer reps, use lighter weight for higher reps, keep rest periods very
short, combine techniques such as supersets, employ intensity techniques such as
forced reps, train muscle groups more frequently, or have you in the gym more
often all seem to be effective ways to keep fat burning maximized.

Of course, you can’t employ all of these techniques into every workout, but a
good strategy is to employ a multitude of these techniques in each program you
design and swap out techniques as you change up programs. You will also need
to add some form of cardio to these strength programs in order to maximize fat
loss. Cardio techniques that work best are covered in chapter 12.

If you are not keen at designing your own training programs, turn to chapter 13,
which has several fat-loss programs. Not only have these programs been shown
to be effective for fat loss, but trainees often have gains in muscle size and
strength. These programs also serve as a good template for combining the
techniques discussed in this chapter.
             Chapter 12
 Cardio Training for Maximizing Fat
                Loss
Cardio is the intimate word we give to aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise refers
to the energy system used. With weight training, which is done with high
intensity for short bursts followed by a short rest period, you tend to rely more
on the anaerobic energy systems to fuel muscle contractions. With aerobic
exercise, which typically refers to rhythmic movement at a low to moderate
intensity for prolonged periods, such as jogging or bicycling, the energy systems
that fuel this type of activity require oxygen.

Although it is possible to lose fat with just weight training, especially certain
types of programs, to truly maximize fat loss you need to incorporate some form
of cardio in your training regimen. Plus, cardio provides health benefits, such as
improved cardiovascular health, reduced risk of diabetes and other metabolic
diseases, and reduced risk of certain types of cancer. It can also help to enhance
recovery from weight training. This chapter covers the most effective forms of
cardio for fat loss while maintaining muscle and building muscle.


           HIIT Versus Steady-State Cardio
There was a time when bodybuilders would only consider doing low-to
moderate-intensity, steady-state cardio, such as fast walking or pedaling a
stationary bike at a moderate intensity. Anything more intense would be
considered a no-no. There were two main reasons for this. The first was that they
believed that more intense cardio would burn up muscle tissue (meaning that
muscle tissue would be broken down to fuel the exercise). The second belief was
that lower-intensity cardio was reported to put a person in an optimal fat-burning
zone.

Today, we know that both of those lines of thinking are flawed. The concept that
high-intensity cardio will burn up muscle while low-intensity cardio will spare
muscle is quite wrong. In fact, if you just compared the muscle mass of longer-
distance runners (who spend a good deal of their training at a slower pace for
longer periods) to the muscle mass of sprinters (who spend a good deal of their
training at higher intensities for short periods), you could see how that logic is
flawed.

When you train at a slow and steady pace for a longer period, you train your
muscle fibers to be more aerobic and have greater endurance. There is some
evidence that suggests that muscle fibers adapt to becoming more aerobic and to
increasing endurance by becoming smaller and weaker. This is because the
smaller a muscle fiber is, the less time it takes for nutrients to travel within the
muscle fiber. This speeds up the rate that nutrients can be burned for fuel.

Another way to consider the misconception that low-intensity cardio done for
longer periods will better spare muscle mass than high-intensity cardio for
shorter periods is to compare a higher-intensity squat workout done for 5 sets
with a weight that limits you to 10 reps per set and a lower-intensity squat
workout done with a weight that allows you to complete 100 reps per set. Would
the higher-intensity leg workout of 10 rep sets burn up muscle tissue while the
lower-intensity leg workout of 100 rep sets would better maintain muscle? No. If
anything, it would be quite the opposite. In fact, doing higher-intensity cardio,
particularly HIIT (discussed later in this chapter), may actually help to increase
muscle mass.

While lower-intensity cardio has been shown to burn a higher percentage of
calories from fat, you actually burn fewer total calories with lower-intensity
cardio. So to burn an equivalent amount of calories and fat as higher-intensity
cardio, you would have to exercise for considerably longer. One obvious
problem with doing excessive cardio is time. Most people barely have time to fit
in a 60-minute weight workout, let alone another 60 minutes or longer of cardio.
However, another problem with excessively long cardio, particularly for men, is
that it has been found to lower testosterone levels.

Focusing on just how many calories you burn and how many calories you burn
from fat during a workout is also flawed. The real benefit of cardio for fat loss is
the amount of calories (and calories from fat) that you burn the rest of the day
after the workout is over. This is due to the process known as EPOC (excess
postexercise oxygen consumption). It refers to the boost in your metabolism, or
calorie burning that comes after the workout is over. When you work out, you
burn calories to fuel your muscles. But when the workout is over, your body
keeps burning more calories than normal, despite the fact that you are doing
nothing. This is due to the processes involved in recovery from exercise. After
exercise, your body must repair damaged muscle fibers, restock muscle glycogen
levels, remove lactic acid from the muscles, and so on. All these processes
require calories, and a lot of those calories come from fat. And when it comes to
EPOC, this is where HIIT really destroys steady-state cardio done at a lower
intensity.

Science Behind HIIT
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) is a form of cardio that involves intervals
of high-intensity exercise (such as running at a very fast pace) interspersed with
intervals of low-intensity activity (walking at a slow pace) or complete rest. This
is in sharp contrast to the typical continuous steady-state (slow and steady)
exercise that is done at a moderate intensity, such as walking at a fast pace or
jogging for 30 to 60 minutes.

Although HIIT seems to have gained popularity in the last few years, the concept
is actually quite old. The origin of HIIT can be traced back many decades to a
technique called Fartlek training that was used by track coaches to better prepare
runners. Fartlek is actually Swedish for speed (fart) and play (lek), so it means
speed play, which is essentially what HIIT is. Today HIIT has crossed over to the
fitness industry because of its beneficial results that have been established
through both anecdotal reports and published research studies. In fact, studies
comparing HIIT to continuous steady-state cardio have shown that HIIT is far
superior for fat loss, despite the fact that it requires much less time.

One of the first studies to discover that HIIT was more effective for fat loss was
a 1994 study by researchers at Laval University in Ste-Foy, Quebec, Canada
(Tremblay et al. 1994). They reported that young men and women who followed
a 15-week HIIT program lost significantly more body fat than those following a
20-week continuous steady-state endurance program, despite the fact that the
steady-state program burned about 15,000 calories more during exercise than the
HIIT program. A 2001 study from East Tennessee State University demonstrated
similar findings with participants who followed an 8-week HIIT program
(participants dropped 2 percent body fat) compared to those who followed a
continuous steady-state program (participants had no drop in body fat) on a
treadmill (King 2001). A study from Australia reported that females following a
20-minute HIIT program that consisted of 8-second sprints followed by 12
seconds of rest lost 6 times more body fat than the group who followed a 40-
minute cardio program performed at a constant intensity of 60 percent of their
maximum heart rate (Trapp 2008).

A study from the University of Western Ontario suggests that you can burn off
more body fat with even less than 15 minutes of HIIT than with slow and steady
cardio (Macpherson 2011). The research team had male and female participants
follow one of two cardio programs for six weeks. One group ran slow and steady
for 30 to 60 minutes three times per week. The other group did four to six 30-
second sprints with a 4-minute rest period between sprints three times per week.
That’s basically HIIT with an extended rest interval between the high-intensity
exercise intervals. The group doing the sprint intervals lost more than twice as
much body fat as the slow-and-steady group despite the fact that they did only 2
to 3 minutes of total cardio exercise per day and just 6 to 9 minutes per week!
The sprint interval group also gained over one pound of muscle. So this type of
cardio not only burns off body fat and spares muscle, but it also may even help
to build it.

One of the major reasons HIIT works so well in reducing body fat to a greater
degree than continuous steady-state cardio appears to be due to the greater
increase in resting metabolism after HIIT. Researchers at Baylor College of
Medicine reported that participants who followed a HIIT workout on a stationary
cycle burned significantly more calories during the 24 hours after the workout
than those who cycled at a moderate steady-state intensity (Treuth, 1996). The
East Tennessee State University study mentioned earlier also found that
participants following the HIIT program burned more calories during the 24
hours after exercise than the steady-state cardio group did. A study presented at
the 2007 annual meeting of the American College of Sports Medicine by Florida
State University researchers reported that participants who performed HIIT
burned about 10% more calories during the 24 hours after exercise as those who
performed continuous steady-state exercise, despite the fact that the total calories
burned during the workouts were the same (Meuret et al. 2007).

In addition to the increase in resting metabolism, research confirms that HIIT is
effective at enhancing the metabolic machinery in muscle cells that promote fat
burning and blunt fat production. Researchers in the Laval University study that
found a decrease in body fat with HIIT discovered that the HIIT participants’
muscle fibers had significantly higher markers for fat oxidation (fat burning)
than those in the continuous steady-state exercise group. A study of young
females who performed seven HIIT workouts over a two-week period showed a
30 percent increase in both fat oxidation and levels of muscle enzymes that
enhance fat oxidation (Talanian et al. 2007). Research shows that this may be
due to an increase in mitochondria, the machinery in muscle cells and other cells
that burns fat to produce energy. Scalzo and colleagues (2014) found that both
men and women completing four to eight bouts of 30-seocnd sprints on a
stationary cycle had significant boosts in mitochondrial biogenesis. In a study
from the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, participants with
metabolic syndrome who followed a 16-week HIIT program had a 100 percent
greater decrease in content of the fat-producing enzyme fatty acid synthase
compared to participants who followed continuous moderate-intensity exercise.
In other words, HIIT enhances the body’s ability to burn fat and prevent the
storage of fat (Tjonna 2007).

Another way that HIIT appears to work has to do with getting the fat to where it
will be burned away for good. Talanian and colleagues (2010) shed some light
on another way that HIIT burns more body fat: 6 weeks of HIIT increased the
amount of special proteins in muscle cells that are responsible for carrying fat
into the mitochondria (where fat is burned for fuel) by up to 50 percent. Having
more of these proteins in muscle means that more fat can be burned up for fuel
during workouts and when resting.

HIIT, done at a higher intensity for a shorter time, will not only help you
maintain your muscle but can actually help you build muscle mass. In a study by
Smith and colleagues (2009), male participants following a six-week HIIT
program (done for 15 minutes per day, 3 days a week, at a ratio of 2:1 for
exercise to rest) while supplementing with beta-alanine gained over 2 pounds of
muscle despite the fact that they never lifted weights during the program. The
2011 study on sprinting from the University of Western Ontario discussed earlier
reported that those performing 30-second sprint intervals actually gained some
muscle mass, while the slow-and-steady cardio group did not. A study from the
UK reported that obese participants following a low-carbohydrate diet lost
muscle mass, yet those performing HIIT along with the low-carbohydrate diet
were able to maintain muscle mass (Sartor 2010). This makes sense when you
consider that weight training is technically a form of HIIT— short periods of
high-intensity exercise are interspersed with periods of rest.
One reason HIIT can lead to greater gains in muscle mass may be an increase in
muscle protein synthesis. The Colorado State University study showing an
increase in mitochondrial biogenesis also reported a significant increase in
muscle protein synthesis after the sprints. The results were greater in male than
in female participants. Another reason for greater gains in muscle mass with
HIIT may be the anabolic hormone testosterone. New Zealand researchers
(Paton et al. 2009) had competitive cyclists complete 4 weeks of HIIT training
involving 30-second sprints on a stationary cycle separated by 30 seconds of
rest. One group sprinted with high resistance on the pedals, making it harder to
pedal, while the other group used a lighter resistance, which was easier to pedal.
Both groups pedaled as fast as they could during the 30-second sprints. The men
pedaling at the highest resistance increased their testosterone levels by almost
100 percent, while the group pedaling at a lighter resistance increased
testosterone levels by only about 60 percent.

Another reason for both the health benefits of HIIT and its benefits on muscle
mass, not to mention fat loss, has to do with improved insulin sensitivity. When
you improve insulin sensitivity, not only does this help you keep lean and
prevent diabetes, but it can also aid muscle growth. Insulin is an anabolic
hormone that acts on the muscle cells to increase muscle protein synthesis,
decrease muscle protein breakdown, and drive more glucose, amino acids, and
creatine and carnitine into muscle cells. Researchers at Watt University in
Edinburgh had participants follow a two-week training program with workouts
consisting of just four to six 30-second sprints on stationary cycles (Babraj et al.
2009). Sprints were separated by 4 minutes of rest. They discovered that at the
end of the two weeks the participants’ blood glucose and insulin levels were
reduced by almost 15 and 40 percent, respectively, after the consumption of 75
grams of glucose. Insulin sensitivity, which is the measurement of how well
insulin does its job at the muscle cells, improved by about 25 percent. In a more
recent study by Racil and colleagues (2013), young females following a 12-week
HIIT program had positive changes in insulin sensitivity as well as reduced waist
size, lower total cholesterol, lower LDL cholesterol, and higher HDL cholesterol.

This does not mean that you should never do steady-state cardio. If you enjoy
jogging, hiking, or cycling, then by all means include that exercise in your
program. However, you should still consider adding a few days of HIIT into
your routine. This not only will improve your physique but will also improve
your performance when you do steady-state cardio.
Cardio Frequency
Many weight training enthusiasts ask about the minimum amount of cardio that
needs to be done each week to result in fat loss? This question usually comes
from those who think that cardio is only the slow-and-steady type done on a
treadmill or stationary bike. Most people who enjoy weightlifting tend to loathe
cardio. Of course, once they realize that cardio can be done with weights in HIIT
style, they end up asking how much is too much. At any rate, there is some
evidence both from research and anecdotal reports that the minimum amount of
cardio that you should do each week is three workouts.

One study placed 90 male and female participants on an eight-week program that
consisted of 30 minutes of straight cardio (Willis et al. 2009). They divided the
participants into groups based on how often they exercised each week. One
group served as a control and did no exercise, a second group did the cardio
workout fewer than two times a week, a third group did the workouts two or
three times per week, and the fourth group did cardio four or more times per
week. They discovered that at the end of the eight weeks only the last group
performing cardio four or more times per week lost a decent amount of body fat
(almost 15 pounds of it). Of course, the participants were not weight training in
addition to doing cardio, and they also weren’t doing HIIT, so it’s hard to say
from this study precisely how many days of cardio you need in addition to
weight training.

Anecdotal reports suggest a minimum of three HIIT cardio sessions per week in
addition to weight training. But obviously, the more you do each week, the
greater the expected fat loss. In fact, you can do seven days of cardio per week if
you prefer. And that can be seven days of HIIT. Some are worried that doing
HIIT every day will lead to overtraining. However, as long as you switch up the
exercises, you can do HIIT every day of the week. After all, it is typically done
for only 15 to 30 minutes, and that is not total exercise time. Research on
athletes suggests that those using HIIT every day had no decrement in
performance. Hatle et al. (2014) found that those performing eight sessions of
HIIT per week for 3 weeks had similar increases in O2max as those doing three
sessions per week for 8 weeks. This supports an earlier study in Alpine skiers
(Breil et al. 2010) that showed a 6 percent increase in O2max after 15 sessions
of HIIT performed for 11 days. Both studies, however, reported that the increase
in O2max was not apparent until several days after stopping the frequent HIIT.
This suggests that performing HIIT every day could overtax the body and lead to
overtraining. So if improving aerobic performance is one of your goals, you
should provide at least one rest day, if not three or four, per week. However,
doing two or three weeks of HIIT every day can lead to quicker improvements in
endurance as long as you back off on the frequency later on. For the best fat loss,
do three to six sessions of HIIT per week, leaving a minimum of one day of rest.

Timing of Cardio
Whether you do your cardio immediately before you lift weights, immediately
after, or even during weight workouts (such as cardioacceleration discussed at
the end of this chapter), or at a different time of day or completely different day,
matters little to the effect it will have on fat loss. The most critical aspect of
scheduling your cardio is when you will be most consistent doing it.

If you find that you tend to skip your cardio workouts when you leave it to after
your weight workout, then you should consider doing it before or during your
weight training workout or at a completely different time or day. There are two
options when it comes to doing cardio during your weight training workouts.
The first option is to do cardioacceleration, which involves a 30-to 90-second
bout of high-intensity cardio in between every set. Or you can do a bout of HIIT
in between muscle groups. For example, if you train back, biceps, and calves in
one workout, you could do 10 minutes of HIIT in between back and biceps, in
between biceps and calves, and after calves for a total of 30 minutes of HIIT.
Several studies have reported that breaking up your cardio into several shorter
sessions allows you to burn more calories during the workout as well as more
calories after the workout is over (Altena 2003; Almuzaini 1998; Kaminsky
1990). This has also been shown to allow people to lose significantly more total
fat over a prolonged period.

Fasted Cardio
Another misconception about cardio is that the best time to do it is first thing in
the morning on an empty stomach. Research does in fact show that you burn
more total fat when you do cardio fasted than you would if you ate first. Some
research shows that you can burn 20 percent more fat when you do cardio in the
morning on an empty stomach (Gonzalez et al. 2013). However, as mentioned
earlier, how many calories—and specifically the number you burn from fat—
during the exercise should not be the major focus. When you burn carbohydrate
during exercise, you burn more fat after the exercise is over, and when you burn
more fat during exercise, you burn more carbohydrate after (Deighton 2012). In
other words, it’s more about the total amount of calories and fat you burn
throughout the day, not just during exercise. Research also suggests that whether
you exercise first thing in the morning fasted or fed, you end up burning the
same amount of calories throughout the day (Hansen 2005).

So, generally speaking, your best bet is to not worry about doing cardio first
thing in the morning or fasted. If doing cardio first thing in the morning is best
for your schedule, then by all means do your cardio then. But it is advisable to
have at least a protein shake—ideally a protein shake and some carbohydrate,
such as fruit—before the workout. If you are trying to limit carb intake, then you
may want to avoid the carbohydrate until after the workout.

There is one time when fasted cardio may be a strategy you want to employ. I
have found that when a male’s body fat is in the low single digits (somewhere
around 5 to 6 percent) or a female’s body fat is in the low teens (somewhere
around 13 to 14 percent), but they have one body area that they cannot trim, then
the fasted cardio seems to be beneficial for dropping the stubborn fat. For
example, many males, especially older males, tend to hold fat on the lower back
and obliques. Many females tend to hold fat on the hips and thighs. Once they
have dropped the majority of the subcutaneous fat on the rest of the body, fasted
cardio does seem to work well to rid that last bit of fat. Although there are no
direct data, it may be that when a person is so low in body fat, encouraging the
body to burn more fat during exercise is one way to burn off the stubborn body
fat that otherwise won’t go.


                            Forms of HIIT
HIIT can take on many forms and be done with virtually any equipment or
absolutely none. You can do it while running on a track or a treadmill, riding a
stationary bike or climbing a stair stepper, or doing calisthenics and using your
body weight or explosive exercises and free weights. Chapters 25 (whole-body
exercises) and 26 (calisthenic exercises) are good resources for exercises to use
for HIIT.
There is almost no wrong way to use HIIT other than not doing it at all. And
while there are numerous exercises that you can do with HIIT, there are also
numerous ways to employ HIIT. Following are some of the more effective ways
to use HIIT.

Standard HIIT
Standard HIIT refers to scheduling a block of time for just HIIT. Some evidence
suggests that when doing HIIT, a ratio of 2:1 of high-intensity exercise to low-
intensity exercise, or work to rest, provides the best benefits in performance, fat
loss, and health. For example, you could sprint as fast as possible for 30 seconds
and walk for 15 seconds. Or you could jump rope for 1 minute and rest for 30
seconds. Of course, studies like the University of Western Ontario study on
sprinting for 30 seconds and resting for 4 minutes suggest that results are still
substantial even with a HIIT work-to-rest ratio of 1:8. Despite that, I would still
recommend shooting for a 2:1 ratio. If that is too much for you to handle at first,
start off with a 1:2, or a 1:4, or even a 1:8 ratio of work to rest and gradually
increase the ratio over time.

The intensity of the high-intensity exercise intervals can be something that is
tightly prescribed, such as a certain percent of your maximum heart rate, or
loosely determined based on what feels intense to you. Because I prefer to do a
variety of exercises, such as dumbbell cleans, kettlebell swings, and bench step-
ups, checking your heart rate manually or even on a heart rate monitor is pretty
impractical. So I prefer to use a simple RPE (rating of perceived exertion) scale
of 1 to 10, as shown in table 12.1. During the high-intensity exercise intervals
you should be somewhere from 6 to 9. Stick with the lower end of that range
when just beginning with the goal of increasing your RPE as you go. If you are
not taking complete rest between the high-intensity exercise intervals, then your
RPE during the low-intensity exercise intervals should be somewhere in the
range of 1 to 3.

You should also shoot to increase the block of total time spent doing HIIT as you
progress. Even if you start with just 10 to 15 minutes, that is fine. But your goal
should be to slowly increase your total time.
Beginner to Advanced HIIT Program
The HIIT program in table 12.2 will progress you from the beginner level to the
intermediate level of HIIT proficiency. This can be done with any equipment,
such as a treadmill, jump rope, pair of dumbbells, kettlebell, exercise bands,
medicine ball, TRX, or just your body weight and calisthenics.

The suggested time of each phase is not carved in stone. If you feel you need to
spend more than two weeks at a particular phase before moving up, then do so.
Or if a phase seems too easy and you want to jump right up to the next phase,
then do so. It starts with a work-to-rest ratio of 1:4 in phase 1 for a total workout
time of just under 15 minutes. Then in phase 2, it bumps up the amount of time
in the work phase to bring the ratio up to 1:2 and the total workout time to 17
minutes. In phase 3, the rest is cut in half to bring the ratio up to 1:1, and the
total workout time increases to 18.5 minutes. And finally in phase 4, the rest is
cut in half again to get the ratio to 2:1 and the total time at 20 minutes.
Tabata Intervals
Tabata intervals use a 2:1 ratio of work to rest. But specifically you alternate 20
seconds of high-intensity exercise with 10 seconds of rest done for eight cycles
in this fashion for a total of 4 minutes per exercise. The point is to not fall into a
specific heart rate range but to just go as intensely as possible. So shoot for an
RPE of about 9 to 10.

Tabatas are named after the Japanese scientist who designed them, Dr. Izumi
Tabata. He was actually looking for a way to better train athletes. The story is
that he was analyzing the training of the Japanese speed skating team in an effort
to enhance their performance. He discovered that when he had athletes perform
eight cycles of these 20-second high-intensity exercise intervals followed by 10
seconds of rest, they increased both their aerobic (endurance) capacity and their
anaerobic (quick power) capacity—the two things that speed skaters need
(Tabata et al. 1996; 1997). In other words, whether you’re an endurance athlete
like a cyclist or a power athlete like a weightlifter, Tabata offers you benefits
because it trains both the major metabolic pathways that give you endurance and
those that give you explosive energy. That’s why so many athletes do Tabata
intervals. And, of course, they work very well for fat loss.

You can either choose anywhere from 4 to 8 exercises and do them as a block of
Tabatas for a total cardio workout time of 16 to 32 minutes. Or you can do one
or two exercises Tabata style in between muscle groups. For example, if you
trained chest, triceps, and abs in one workout, you could start with Tabata rope
jumping for 4 minutes to warm up. Then after finishing chest, do Tabata
kettlebell swings for 4 minutes and Tabata bench step-ups for another 4 minutes
before training triceps. After triceps, you could do 4 minutes of Tabata dumbbell
cleans and Tabata jumping jacks before training abs. Then you do more two
more Tabata-style exercises after abs for a total time of 28 minutes of Tabata
HIIT.

A typical Tabata exercise would look like this, using kettlebell swings as an
example:

Time Activity
20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings
10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

20 seconds Kettlebell swings

10 seconds Rest

Power HIIT
Power HIIT involves doing intervals of explosive exercises with short intervals
of rest. These exercises could include power cleans, snatches, squat jumps,
power push-ups, and kettlebell swings. These exercises are typically done to
develop explosive power, strength, and speed for sport performance. Combining
them with HIIT allows you to build more muscle power while increasing fat loss
and cardiorespiratory conditioning.

With Power HIIT, both the exercise intervals and the rest intervals last 20
seconds. So it works on a 1:1 ratio of exercise to rest. This time frame typically
allows you to complete about 3 or 4 reps during each exercise interval. This rep
range is perfect for building power. Then you get an equal amount of time to
recover to help you better maintain power on the next exercise interval. This 1:1
work-to-rest ratio can also help to build muscle size, strength, and power by
boosting testosterone levels. The New Zealand study discussed earlier found that
cyclists performing 30-second high-powered sprints separated by 30 seconds of
rest (1:1 work-to-rest ratio) increased their testosterone levels by up to 100
percent.

For each exercise you do three exercise-to-rest intervals and then move on to the
next exercises. This way you have worked at building power on that exercise
without completely exhausting the specific muscles used on that move.

The power exercises in Power HIIT are very fast and explosive. These fast reps
primarily recruit the fast-twitch muscle fibers, which grow the biggest, strongest,
and fastest. So it’s easy to understand how using HIIT workouts can help you
build muscle and power. But the fast-twitch muscle fibers also burn the most
calories when you use them, as discussed in chapter 11. Plus, most of the
exercises in Power HIIT use so many muscle groups that they also burn more
calories that way, as also discussed in chapter 11.

Power HIIT Workouts
Start each Power HIIT workout with a 5-minute HIIT warm-up of rope jumping
or jumping jacks. This warm-up should be done in typical HIIT fashion at a 2:1
ratio of jumping to rest. In this case, it’s 30 seconds of jumping followed by 15
seconds of rest. You do 7 cycles of this for a total of 5 minutes. If you do the
Power HIIT workouts after weight training, then you do not need to do the 5-
minute HIIT warm-up.

After the jump rope HIIT warm-up (see table 12.3), go right into the Power HIIT
workout (see table 12.4). You do three 20-second sets of each exercise, taking 20
seconds of rest between sets and exercises. In workout A, start with squat jumps
(chapter 21) for building leg power. Then you move into power push-ups
(chapter 14) for building power in the chest and triceps. Next power cleans
(chapter 25) are done with dumbbells or a barbell. Then it’s on to medicine ball
overhead throws (chapter 25). If you don’t have a medicine ball, you can simply
do band shoulder presses (chapter 15) or even barbell or dumbbell push presses
(chapter 25). Finish with the band standing crunch (chapter 24) to build strength
and power in the midsection. If bands are a problem, you can do a medicine ball
crunch throw (chapter 24) or even a regular crunch with explosive reps on the
positive rep.

Because you’ll want to repeat this workout several times a week, I’ve provided a
workout B so you can alternate between the workouts without hitting the same
exercises in the same order every time. In workout B, you start with the
kettlebell snatch (chapter 25). You can also do this with a dumbbell as well if
kettlebells are not an option for you. Then you move into the band sprint
(chapter 26) and then calf jumps (chapter 23) to build strength and power in the
calves. Then do kettlebell swings (chapter 25), which can also be done with a
dumbbell, and finish with the band woodchopper (chapter 24) (or you can use a
cable or a dumbbell) to build rotational power in the upper body and strengthen
the core. Since you have to do both sides of the body, instead of doing three sets
of 20 seconds each, do two 20-second sets on each side for a total of four sets.

In both workouts A and B you do five exercises for three 20-second sets each
(except in workout B where you have an extra set for woodchoppers) with 20-
second rest periods; this totals 10 minutes. With the jump rope HIIT work for 5
minutes and the 10 minutes of Power HIIT, that’s a total of 15 minutes of intense
cardio that not only burns fat and enhances cardiorespiratory fitness and health
but also builds overall muscle strength, power, and mass. If your goal is to
maximize muscle mass, strength, and power, and cardio is more of an
afterthought, then keep it at this duration. Work on increasing the weight on the
exercises or the number of reps you can bang out in those 20 seconds. If fat loss
is your primary goal, as well as the cardiorespiratory benefits that this novel
form of cardio offers, then you’ll want to progressively bump up your total time
of Power HIIT. I’ve offered three stages to work up to; each stage increases total
Power HIIT time. Go at your own pace, and when the 15-minute workout no
longer is much of a challenge, start on phase 2, which brings your total HIIT
workout to almost 20 minutes. Then when that becomes less of a challenge, it’s
time to get serious and jump into phase 3, which brings your total HIIT workout
time to 25 minutes.

You can do the Power HIIT either at the beginning or the end of your workouts
or on a separate day. It all depends on your major goals. If you’re using Power
HIIT to boost muscle power and athletic performance, do this workout at the
start of your weight training or on a separate day from your usual weight training
altogether. If fat loss is the primary goal with Power HIIT, you can do it either at
the beginning or at the end of your weight workouts or on a separate day from
weights.
Cardioacceleration
Cardioacceleration refers to doing intervals of cardio (anywhere from 30 to 90
seconds) in between sets of resistance exercise. So, for example, on chest day,
you would do one set of the bench press; then instead of sitting on the bench for
2 to 3 minutes resting, you perform 30 to 90 seconds of high-intensity cardio.
Then you go do the next set of bench presses and continue in this manner
throughout the entire workout.

Multiply those 30 to 90 seconds of cardio by the number of sets you complete in
each workout, and it adds up. If you train chest, triceps, and abs, and do 12 sets
for chest, 9 sets for triceps, and 9 sets for abs (30 total sets), and complete 60
seconds of cardio between each set, then you just completed 30 minutes of high-
intensity cardio during your chest, triceps, and ab workout. That means that you
don’t have to spend extra time doing cardio after the weight workout is over or
on a separate day. You can rest assured you’ve done your weight training and
your cardio, all in one fell swoop.

Although it may not be readily apparent, cardioacceleration is a form of HIIT.
You are doing 30-to 90-second intervals of cardio and then moving on to a set of
weightlifting. Then you go back to the cardio interval, and then back to the
weight training interval.

Cardioacceleration is based on a study by University of California at Santa Cruz
researchers. Trained participants completing 30 to 60 seconds of cardio in
between sets of weight training for over two months recovered better than those
resting normally between sets (Davis et al. 2008). Not only does this method of
HIIT allow for better recovery after workouts, but it allows for greater recovery
between sets. It is surprising that this technique works so well in aiding recovery
between sets. In fact, in my programs it has helped thousands of men and women
break PRs while getting leaner at the same time. Many worry that doing cardio
in between sets will decrease strength in weightlifting, but as I have found, once
the body adapts to the cardioacceleration, it appears to enhance strength and
recovery between sets.

Another nice thing about cardioacceleration is that it does not mean that you
have to use the treadmill or other typical form of cardio equipment. You can do
the cardio interval right there at the station where you are weight training. So, for
example, if you are doing the bench press, you can do 30 to 90 seconds of bench
step-ups on the bench-press bench. If you’re doing dumbbell flys, then do
dumbbell cleans for cardio right next to your bench. Or the simplest exercise of
all is to run in place. This way you do not lose your spot in a busy gym. For
good exercises to use for cardioacceleration, see chapter 26. Many exercises in
chapter 25 also work well for cardioacceleration.

Start at on the low end of scale with 30 seconds of cardio in between sets. Over
time, you can increase that by 15 seconds until you are up to doing 90 seconds of
cardioacceleration in between sets. For a sample training program that uses
cardioacceleration, see the TRX Cardioacceleration program (table 12.5) and
Shortcut to Shred program in chapter 13.
                                 Summary
While there is much confusion regarding cardio, this chapter should clarify the
best type of cardio to do and why, the best times to do it, and the frequency of it.
The sample HIIT workouts will help you put that knowledge into practice and
maximize fat loss while optimizing performance and gains in muscle mass. The
variety of HIIT forms will allow you to find a HIIT program that best suits you.
Now all that you have to do is get out there and do it.
              Chapter 13
   Programs for Maximizing Fat Loss
The training programs in this chapter employ a variety of the strength training
techniques covered in chapter 11 combined with the cardio techniques covered
in chapter 12. Many of these programs have become very popular on the
Internet. Over the years I have received feedback from hundreds of thousands of
people following these plans. The transformations have been nothing but
spectacular, and many drop their percentage of body fat by up to 10 percent
while increasing their muscle mass, strength, and endurance.

These programs are best suited for intermediate to advanced weightlifters and
not typically for beginners. Beginners should focus on the fundamentals of
weight training with any of my beginner programs along with the Beginner to
Advanced HIIT program. In fact, beginners will shed significant body fat just
from consistently following a weight training program.

                        Feel the Burn Workout
This workout program uses techniques covered in chapter 11 for increasing fat
loss. Each workout starts with an explosive movement using fast-twitch muscle
fibers that burn the most calories. The workouts also incorporate a lot of
multijoint exercises to burn more calories before and after the workout. They
also employ both heavy weight for low reps to boost metabolic rate after the
workout and lighter weight for high reps to boost calorie burn during the
workout. Rest periods are kept short to keep the calorie burn up during and after
the workout, and some supersets are used to further the calorie burn during the
workout and after.

This workout program follows a four-day training split (see table 13.1).
However, to truly maximize fat loss, do all four workouts back to back over four
days and rest on the fifth day. Then start over on the sixth day and continue in
this fashion. Be sure to add some form of HIIT to this program, whether it’s a
block of standard HIIT done separately from the workouts, cardioacceleration, or
some form of HIIT in between muscle groups.
                      Shortcut to Shred Program
This program uses periodization in a microcycle fashion. It also uses two forms
of periodization: linear and reverse linear. The program splits each muscle group
into two workouts each week. The first half of the week (Monday, Tuesday, and
Wednesday) you train using mainly multijoint exercises. For example, for chest
you will only do presses using both barbell and dumbbells. The second half of
the week (Thursday, Friday, and Saturday), when you train each muscle group
for the second time, use mainly single-joint (isolation) exercises. For example,
on chest you will do only fly exercises such as dumbbell flys and cable
crossovers.

The multijoint-focused workouts in the first half of the week follow the linear
periodized scheme and get heavier each week. However, the single-joint-focused
workouts in the second half of the week follow a reverse linear periodization
scheme and therefore get lighter each week.

There are a few exceptions for obvious reasons. For starters, there aren't any
really useful multijoint exercises for biceps. So the first biceps workout each
week you use barbell exercises, such as barbell curls and barbell preacher curls,
while the second half of the week you use dumbbell and cable biceps exercises.
Another issue is that there aren't many single-joint exercises for back, except the
straight-arm pulldown and similar movements. So the first time you train your
back each week, use rowing exercises, such as the barbell bent-over row and
seated cable row. Then the second time you train your back that week, use only
pulldown exercises as well as the single-joint straight-arm pulldown. The other
exceptions are abdominals, calves, and forearms.

The weight workouts also enhance fat burning because of the exercise selection
and rep ranges. The multijoint exercises increase the amount of calories you
burn during the workout. The higher-rep workouts also increase the number of
calories burned during the workout. The heavy-weight and low-rep workouts, on
the other hand, help to boost calorie and fat burn after the workout.

There are two three-week phases to this six-week program (see table 13.2). In
phase 1 you start with reps in the range of 9 to 11 for the multijoint-focused
training in the first half of week 1. For the single-joint-focused work in the
second half of the week, you do reps in the range of 12 to 15. In week 2 for the
multijoint-focused training in the first half of the week, the weight increases to
drop the rep range down to 6 to 8 per set. The second half of the week when you
are doing the single-joint-focused work, the weight is reduced to allow reps to
increase to 16 to 20 per set. Then in the third and final week of phase 1, weight
increases again to drop reps down to just 2 to 5 per set on the multijoint-focused
workouts in the first half of the week. And in the second half of the week during
the single-joint-focused workouts, weight decreases again and reps go up to 21
to 30 per set.

In phase 2 the cycle repeats again. So in the first week, which is week 4 of the
program, the weight is reduced to allow the reps to go back to 9 to 11 per set
during the first half of the week for the multijoint-focused workouts. And the
weight increases for the single-joint-focused work in the second half of the week
to bring the reps back down to 12 to 15 per set. And each week it follows just as
in phase 1. However, the major difference in phase 2 is that the majority of
exercises are different except for a few of the staple exercises that are key for
strength. Changing up the exercises allows you to target slightly different fibers
in the muscles for the best overall gains in size.
To enhance fat loss, not to mention aid recovery, this program uses
cardioacceleration in between each set in every workout. If you keep moving
from exercise to exercise without taking any rest before or after the
cardioacceleration, you can complete most of these workouts in under an hour.
That’s less than an hour for both weight training and cardio.

I’ve also included an intensity technique that I call cardioaccelerated rest-
pause/drop sets. On the last set of each exercise you take that set to muscle
failure. Then you rack the weight and “rest” 15 to 20 seconds. I say “rest”
because you won’t really rest. You will do cardioacceleration by running in place
for those 15 to 20 seconds. Then you pick up the weight again and continue
doing reps for that exercises until you reach muscle failure again. But you’re not
finished yet. Now you immediately decrease the weight you are using by 20 to
30 percent and continue doing reps of that exercise until you reach muscle
failure again. Now you are finally finished with that exercise and can move on to
the next one. For body-weight exercises, or exercises where the weight is so
light that you cannot do a drop set, you will do two cardioaccelerated rest-
pause/drop sets. So after reaching muscle failure on the last set of an exercise,
immediately go into 15 to 20 seconds of running in place. Then continue doing
reps of that exercise until you reach muscle failure again. Then immediately do
another 15 to 20 seconds of running in place, and then immediately do more reps
of that exercise until you reach muscle failure yet again. Now you are finally
finished with that exercise.
                      Super Shredded 8 Program
This program, also known as SS8 (see table 13.3), incorporates numerous
techniques to maximize fat burning while building muscle mass. The first is
compound sets, which are supersets that pair exercises for the same muscle
group. For each superset, one exercise is done with heavy weight for low reps
and the other exercise is done with light weight for high reps. Typically the first
exercise in the first superset pair is heavy weight for low reps. The first exercise
for most muscle groups is typically a multijoint exercise, while the second one is
a single-joint exercise. Then the second superset pair is typically done in the
reverse order: light weight for high reps first and the heavy one second. For
many muscle groups, this second exercise pair is done as a preexhaust superset;
a single-joint (isolation) exercise is first with lighter weight and a multijoint
exercise is next with heavy weight second.

Every two weeks the SS8 program progresses. The heavy exercises progress in a
linear periodized fashion, so they get heavier and you complete fewer reps per
set every two weeks. And every two weeks the light exercises progress in a
reverse linear periodized fashion to get lighter and you perform more reps per
set. This progression will help you get bigger and stronger as well as leaner,
because it will further boost the calories burned during and after the workout.
Another change that occurs every two weeks on SS8 is rest between sets. Start
off in weeks 1 and 2 allowing one minute of rest between supersets. But every
two weeks the rest period drops by 15 seconds. So in weeks 3 and 4 you are
allowed 45 seconds of rest, in weeks 5 and 6 you get only 30 seconds of rest, and
in weeks 7 and 8 you get 15 seconds of rest, which is basically get no real rest
period, between supersets. You go back and forth between the two exercises with
no rest other than the time it takes to move into that next exercise, which is about
15 seconds. You do this until all three or four supersets are completed. Then you
immediately move into the next superset.

The other addition to this program for maximal fat loss is the use of Tabata HIIT
in between muscle groups. For example, on the chest, shoulders, and triceps
workouts when you finish the last chest superset, do Tabata HIIT before you
move on to supersets for shoulders. And after finishing shoulders, do Tabata
HIIT before moving on to triceps. At the end of the workout, finish with more
Tabata HIIT work. For info on Tabatas, see chapter 12.

Since the rest periods decrease every two weeks, you cannot use
cardioacceleration (see chapter 12) properly with this program. So the next best
thing, or maybe even the better thing, is Tabata HIIT in between muscle groups.
In weeks 1 and 2 do just one Tabata exercise in between muscle groups for a
total time of 12 minutes of Tabata per workout. But in week 3 that increases to
two exercises done Tabata style between muscle groups for a total of six
exercises and a total time of 24 minutes of Tabatas. If you are well conditioned
and accustomed to HIIT, then you can consider starting in weeks 1 and 2 with
two Tabata exercises between each muscle group trained.
                                  HIIT 100s
In HIIT 100s, I have not just combined HIIT with weights, but I have combined
HIIT with two very popular, very intense, and very effective weight training
techniques: hundreds training and German volume training (GVT). German
volume training is also known as 10 × 10 training. You do 10 sets of 10 reps.
This technique is used in chapter 9 in the 5 × 10 program. As the name implies,
hundreds training involves doing 100-rep sets.

With HIIT 100s you start each workout by doing 10 sets of 10 reps for one
exercise per muscle group. The HIIT comes from the rest periods between those
10 sets. Start with just 60 seconds of rest between sets and progressively drop it
down by 10 seconds over the 6 weeks, until you have no rest and you're doing
100 reps straight through. And that brings us to hundreds training. By the way,
10 sets of 10 reps is also 100 reps. And when you're resting only 10 or 20
seconds between sets in the last few weeks of the program, it feels just like
you're doing 100 reps straight through. Most people are not able to complete all
100 reps straight through on HIIT 100s exercises in week 6. Don't worry. If you
fail to reach 100 reps, simply rest as many seconds as you have reps left to
complete until you hit 100 reps. For example, if you hit only 70 reps straight
through, then rest 30 seconds and continue.

You start each workout doing one exercise per muscle group using HIIT 100s.
Then follow that by doing three more sets of the same exercise using your 10-rep
max (a weight that you can normally get for 10 reps). Of course, after doing 10
sets of 10 reps, you will no longer be able to complete 10 full reps with your 10-
rep max weight. You will likely be able to complete only about 5 to 7 reps. On
the third set, do a drop set by dropping down to the weight that you used for
HIIT 100s and do as many reps as possible before you reach muscle failure.
Then you do three sets of one or two more exercises for that same muscle group,
depending on the muscle group. Rest between all sets after the HIIT 100s
exercise will be only one minute to maximize fat burning.

Follow the muscle-group-specific weight training with a final HIIT 100s using a
full-body weight exercise, such as barbell or dumbbell cleans, kettlebell swings,
barbell or dumbbell deadlifts, barbell or dumbbell snatches, one-arm kettlebell or
dumbbell snatch, or my unique lift known as the dead curl press.

On the HIIT 100s sets during weeks 1 through 3 when rest periods are 30
seconds or more, perform the first 3 sets of 10 as fast and explosively as
possible. This will help to build more muscle power and strength, despite using
such light weight. Then for sets 4 through 6, do them slowly and in control,
focusing on the contraction with each rep and squeezing each rep at the top for 1
to 2 seconds. This helps to build the mind–muscle connection, which is critical
for muscle size, shape, and separation. During weeks 4 through 6, when rest
periods are down at 20 seconds and less, your goal is to just complete the
hundred reps. So don’t worry about rep speed or control. Just get the reps done
with the best form possible while your muscles are on fire.

For each exercise, you will do HIIT 100s with select a weight that is equal to
about 50 percent of what you normally could do on that exercise for 10 reps.
Don’t worry if you went too heavy. If you fail to complete all 10 sets of 10 reps
during the program, you can adjust your weight either during that set or at the
next workout. If you can’t complete all 10 reps before hitting the eighth set of 10
reps, then immediately drop the weight by 5 or 10 pounds before the next set of
10 reps. If you can’t complete 10 reps during or after the eighth set, finish all 10
sets doing as many reps as possible for those final sets. Then the next time you
train that muscle group, lower the weight by 5 to 10 pounds.

If some of the exercises that you will do HIIT 100s with are new to you, then
you’ll need to spend some time figuring out how much weight you can do for 10
reps. The week before you start the actual HIIT 100s program, work these
exercises into your training program to figure out an approximate weight that
allows you to perform 10 reps but no more. Then when you start the program the
next week, use half of that weight for your HIIT 100s sets.

When trying to estimate your 10-rep max on each exercise, be sure to do the
HIIT exercise as the first exercise for that muscle group. For example, if you
don’t know what your 10-rep max is on the bench press, do bench press as the
first exercise in your chest workout, aiming for a weight that allows you to
complete just 10 reps. Then follow with your typical chest routine.

While the major benefit of this program (see table 13.4) is rapid fat loss, the
fringe benefits are just as impressive. Even though weight is light, muscle
growth will be a pleasant surprise, especially while you are simultaneously
dropping body fat. You will have insane growth in muscle groups that you do not
typically train with high volume, like traps, forearms, and calves. But you may
also be surprised about the muscle growth you get in places like your arms and
legs. One of the best ways to optimize muscle growth is by making a given
weight more difficult. And HIIT 100s makes a very light weight difficult to
move. The stress your muscle receives because of the difficulty in moving that
weight repeatedly is what influences muscle growth. This pushes muscle fatigue
to new levels, which stimulates the production and buildup of biochemical waste
products. These waste products are not a complete waste, since they stimulate
the release of hormones such as growth hormone (GH), which not only boosts
muscle size but also encourages fat burning.

Of course, another obvious benefit to doing 100 reps with progressively shorter
rest periods is an increase in muscle endurance. This will boost your
conditioning for almost any sport. And even if you do not participate in any
sport, this benefit will ring loud and clear in your workouts. When you go back
to normal training, where you are resting a couple of minutes between sets, your
muscle recovery will be quicker, which means you will be able to get more reps
with the same weight than you normally would on successive sets. That’s
because progressively dropping your rest periods each week forces your muscles
to gradually learn how to recover more quickly between sets.

Most people do not even need to add extra HIIT cardio when following this
program. The HIIT 100s sets are adequate enough to stimulate fat burning.
However, feel free to add some extra HIIT if you wish. You can add
cardioacceleration to the non-HIIT 100s sets, or add HIIT in between muscle
groups, or a HIIT workout after the HIIT 100s workout.
                    Tabata Weight Blast Program
Tabata Weight Blast takes the Tabata that you think of only as cardio and turns it
into a full weight-training program. This way you get the combined benefit of fat
loss while actually building some muscle. Doing very high reps with light
weight for short periods can help you blow past plateaus and add some serious
lean muscle.

Because Tabata enhances endurance, it boosts your body’s ability to burn more
fat. And because it enhances explosive energy, the kind you use in a typical set
of bench presses, it can help you get more reps with a given weight, or use more
weight to get a given number of reps. And that crosses over to more strength as
well as more muscle growth, since a greater overload on the muscle results in
greater growth.

And the benefits won’t end there. Because you do fairly high reps and take very
short rest periods between sets, you’ll increase the amount of blood vessels that
feed your muscle fibers. This will help to get more nutrients, oxygen, and
anabolic hormones to your muscles, which means they’ll have more energy
during workouts and better recovery and growth after the workout.
This Tabata program will have you doing several exercises per muscle group in
Tabata fashion. Do 2 to 4 exercises per muscle group. Each exercise consists of 8
sets of 20 seconds, getting as many reps as possible in those 20 seconds. Rest
only 10 seconds between the 20-second sets. Once you’ve completed 8 sets, rest
1 to 2 minutes and then do the same on the next exercise.

Finish each workout with four full-body or calisthenic exercises done in Tabata
fashion for even more fat burning. When you do these four exercises, take no
scheduled rest between the exercises. Once you have completed all eight cycles
of one exercise, move into the next one as quickly as possible.

It will take some trial and error to select the proper weight for each exercise. I
suggest you start very light because you can work up in weight each week. If
you find a weight that allows you to complete 20 seconds of reps for the first
five or six sets but you cannot do the full 20 seconds on the last two or three sets,
stick with that weight. This way you can set a goal to complete the 20 seconds of
reps for all eight sets before you move on to a heavier weight. Each week that
you follow the Tabata Weight Blast program, your goal should be to increase the
weight you use or the number of reps you complete in those 4 minutes. I suggest
you follow the Tabata Weight Blast program in table 13.5 for about three to six
weeks before returning to a more normal style of straight-set training.
                     Band Whole-Body Workout
This is a great exercise-bands-only workout for when you travel and don’t have
access to free weights or when you just want to switch things up (see table 13.6).
It involves several high-intensity training techniques such as supersets and giant
sets to increase calorie burn during and after the workout. It also is a whole-body
training split, which means that all your major muscle groups will need to
recover after the workout, which will boost metabolic rate after the workout. It
also includes cardioacceleration to help burn the fat.

Do this workout three times per week. Or you can even use it as a cardio
conditioning workout on your off days from weight training. Either way, it’s a
great way to increase your conditioning and decrease body fat.
                           Part V
                     Training Exercises




No matter how sound an exercise program is, it won’t be effective without the
proper execution of the exercises that make up that program. Contained in this
section are the descriptions for proper form of every exercise covered in the
previous chapters, in addition to many others not covered. This is a total of 381
exercises. Accompanying each exercise description is a photo or two of that
exercise to help you visualize the proper execution of each exercise.

Each chapter covers the exercises that train one specific muscle group. These
chapters organize the exercises into similar movements that train that muscle
group in a similar manner. This is to encourage you to frequently substitute
exercises in a program with other exercises that are similar in the effect they will
have on a particular muscle. This not only will help to prevent stagnation of
muscle adaptations and overall boredom but will also encourage the greatest
gains in muscle growth and strength. This is because the slightest variation of an
exercise can target different muscle fibers within a muscle group.

Regardless of your goals, having such an arsenal of exercises to choose from
will help to maximize your results. Whatever program you are following, you
can use this section to change the exercise selections. To do this for any exercise,
simply choose from the list of exercises that accompany that exercise in the
same category. For example, to find an alternative exercise for the bench press,
just choose one of the other exercises from the barbell pressing exercises
category, such as incline bench press, decline bench press, Smith machine flat
bench press, Smith machine incline bench press, or Smith machine decline
bench press. Just be sure to follow the guidelines discussed in chapters 5, 8, and
11 for exercise selection and order. Making the slightest alterations to a program
while staying within the suggested guidelines is the best way to individualize a
program for best results.
                             Chapter 14
                               Chest
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the chest (pectoral) muscles. The pectoralis major muscles are divided into the
upper and lower sections (see diagram). Although many of these exercises are
pressing movements (such as the bench press) that are multijoint exercises,
requiring the use of the deltoids and triceps as well as the pectorals, they are
considered primarily chest exercises because of the movement of the upper arms.
The chest exercises are divided into barbell pressing exercises; dumbbell
pressing exercises; machine, cable, or band pressing exercises; fly-type
exercises; and push-up, dip, and pullover exercises. Wherever a certain type of
exercise is used in a workout, any one of the same type can be substituted (for
example, if the incline bench press is called for, any barbell press exercise can be
substituted).




Barbell Pressing Exercises
     Bench Press
     Incline Bench Press
     Decline Bench Press
     Barbell Bench Press With Bands
     Barbell Floor Press
    Reverse-Grip Bench Press
    Smith Machine Flat Bench Press
    Smith Machine Incline Bench Press
    Smith Machine Decline Bench Press
    One-Arm Smith Machine Bench Press
    One-Arm Smith Machine Negative Bench Press
    Smith Machine Bench Press Throw
    Smith Machine Reverse-Grip Bench Press

Dumbbell Pressing Exercises
    Dumbbell Bench Press
    Incline Dumbbell Press
    Decline Dumbbell Press
    One-Arm Dumbbell Bench Press
    Exercise-Ball Dumbbell Press
    Neutral-Grip Flat Bench Dumbbell Press
    Reverse-Grip Dumbbell Press

Machine, Cable, or Band Pressing Exercises
    Seated Chest Press Machine
    One-Arm Cable Chest Press
    Cable Crossover Chest Press
    Cable Crossover Chest Press (From Low Pulleys)
    Cable Bench Press
    Standing Band Chest Press

Fly-Type Exercises
    Dumbbell Fly
    Incline Dumbbell Fly
    Decline Dumbbell Fly
    Exercise-Ball Dumbbell Fly
    Leaning One-Arm Dumbbell Fly
    Cable Fly
    Cable Crossover
    Low-Pulley Cable Crossover
    Fly Machine
    One-Arm Standing Band Fly
    TRX Fly

Push-Up, Dip, and Pullover Exercises
    Push-Up
    Incline Push-Up
    Decline Push-Up
    Exercise-Ball Push-Up
    Power Push-Up
    Push-Up Ladder
    TRX Push-Up
    Chest Dip
    Dumbbell Pullover



                              Bench Press
   Start

   Lie faceup on a bench-press bench with your feet flat on the floor. Grasp
   the barbell with an overhand grip, hands slightly wider than shoulder-
   width apart.



   Move

   Unrack the bar and slowly lower it toward your chest. Keep your wrists
   aligned with your elbows and your elbows pointed out to your sides so
   that your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your torso. When
   the bar just touches your chest, press back up explosively, driving the
   weight away from you until you almost lock it out.

   Note: For details on performing the bench press to maximize strength,
   see chapter 8.
                      Incline Bench Press
Start

Lie on an incline bench-press bench and grasp the racked barbell with a
grip that’s slightly wider than shoulder width, palms facing toward the
ceiling. Lift the bar off the rack and raise it until your arms are fully
extended.



Move

Bend your elbows to lower the bar to your upper chest. At the bottom,
your elbows should be out and away from your body but slightly in front
of your shoulders. Contract your chest muscles and extend your elbows
to press the bar up until your elbows are almost locked out.
                     Decline Bench Press
Start

Lie back on a decline bench-press bench set to a 30-to 40-degree decline.
Grasp the barbell with an overhand grip with both hands slightly wider
than shoulder-width apart. Lift the bar off the supports and hold it over
your lower chest with your arms extended.



Move

Lower the barbell to your lower chest. Immediately push the bar back up
to full extension without locking your elbows out at the top.
            Barbell Bench Press With Bands
Start

Place an exercise band securely under the bench and secure each barbell
cuff onto either side of the barbell. An easy way to secure the ends of the
bands on the bar is by placing them between two weight plates. If you
cannot place the band under the bench, then use one band on each end of
the bar and secure it to a heavy dumbbell on each side under the bar.



Move

Perform the bench press as you normally would as described earlier in
this chapter. You can also use the bands in a similar manner on the
incline bench press and decline bench press.
                       Barbell Floor Press
Start

Although this is a bench press done on the floor, unless you are very thin,
you will not be able to fit under the bar even when it is loaded with 45-
pound plates. So you will need to set the bar on the lower rack of a power
rack. Once the barbell is set in the power rack, lie faceup on the floor in
the middle of the power rack so that the bar is above your head. Keep
your back flat on the floor and your knees bent with feet flat on the floor.
Unrack the barbell and hold it over your chest.



Move

Lower the bar toward your lower chest until the back of your upper arms
touch the floor. The bar will be several inches above your chest and will
not touch your chest. This is the point of doing the floor press because it
lessens the range of motion, which allows you to use more weight. Press
the bar up and toward your head so that the bar is above your upper chest
in the top position.
                 Reverse-Grip Bench Press
Start

Grasp the barbell with an underhand grip with your hands spaced wider
than shoulder-width apart.



Move

Have a spotter help you unrack the bar because it is difficult to do so
alone with the underhand grip. Once the bar is positioned over your
chest, lower the bar to your lower chest or upper abs and then press the
bar back up toward your head. If you must do this exercise alone, unrack
the bar with an overhand grip and lower it to your chest. With the bar on
your chest, carefully swap your grip from overhand to underhand and
perform the exercise. Research shows that this exercise recruits a greater
number of muscle fibers in the upper pecs than the overhand grip. You
can also use the reverse grip on the incline bench press to further hit the
upper pecs.
            Smith Machine Flat Bench Press
Start

Position yourself on a flat bench that is positioned in a Smith machine so
that the bar lines up with your lower chest (where your nipples are).
Grasp the bar with an overhand grip spaced slightly wider than shoulder-
width apart. Release the safety hooks.



Move
Lower the bar to your chest. Press the bar back up to full arm extension,
stopping just short of elbow lockout. Pause at the top and lower the bar
under control to your upper chest.




          Smith Machine Incline Bench Press
Start

Position yourself on an incline bench (set to about 30 to 40 degrees) that
is positioned in a Smith machine so that the bar lines up with the top of
your chest. Grasp the bar with an overhand grip spaced slightly wider
than shoulder-width apart. Release the safety hooks.



Move

Lower the bar to your chest. Press the bar up to full arm extension,
stopping just short of elbow lockout.
          Smith Machine Decline Bench Press
Start

Position yourself on a decline bench (set to about 30 to 45 degrees) that
is positioned in a Smith machine so that the bar lines up with the lower
part of your chest. Grasp the bar with an overhand grip that is slightly
wider than shoulder-width apart. Release the safety hooks.



Move

Lower the bar to your chest. Press the bar up to full arm extension,
stopping just short of elbow lockout.
        One-Arm Smith Machine Bench Press
Start
Position yourself on a flat bench that is positioned in a Smith machine so
that the bar lines up with your lower chest (where your nipples are).
Grasp the bar with a one-hand overhand grip that is spaced slightly wider
than shoulder-width apart.



Move

Release the safety hooks and then slowly lower the bar to your chest.
Press the bar back up to full arm extension, stopping just short of elbow
lockout. Complete all reps on one arm and then repeat with the other
arm.
 One-Arm Smith Machine Negative Bench Press
Start

For those who train alone, doing negative reps is almost impossible. Yet
the Smith machine allows you to train with negative reps one arm at a
time. Position yourself on a flat bench that is in a Smith machine so that
the bar lines up with your lower chest (where your nipples are). Grasp the
bar with a one-hand overhand grip that is spaced slightly wider than
shoulder-width apart.



Move

Release the safety hooks and then slowly lower the bar about a quarter of
the way down. From there, resist the bar as long as you can to prevent the
bar from lowering to your chest. It should take you no less than 3
seconds and no more than 8 seconds for the weight to reach your chest. If
it’s shorter than this, decrease the weight. If it’s longer, increase the
weight. Press the bar up using both arms and then repeat on the opposite
arm. Alternate arms each rep.




          Smith Machine Bench Press Throw
Start

Position yourself on a flat bench that is in a Smith machine so that the
bar lines up with your lower chest (where your nipples are). Grasp the
bar with an overhand grip that is spaced slightly wider than shoulder-
width apart. Release the safety hooks.



Move

Slowly lower the bar to your chest and explode the bar off of your chest
by pressing the bar back up to full arm extension with as much speed and
power as possible. Allow the bar to leave your hands in the top position.
Catch the bar on the return with slightly bent elbows without stopping the
bar and guide it down to your chest and then immediately perform the
next rep.
     Smith Machine Reverse-Grip Bench Press
Start

Position yourself on a flat bench that is in a Smith machine so that the
bar lines up with your lower chest or upper abs. Grasp the bar with an
underhand grip that is spaced slightly wider than shoulder-width apart.
Release the safety hooks.



Move

Slowly lower the bar to your chest and then press the bar back up to full
arm extension, stopping just short of elbow lockout. You can also do this
on an incline bench.
                    Dumbbell Bench Press
Start
Lie faceup on a flat bench with your feet planted flat on the floor. Hold
the dumbbells just outside your chest with your elbows out to your sides,
so your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your torso.



Move

Forcefully press the weights up in an arc (coming toward each other at
the top) until your arms are fully extended above your chest. Reverse the
motion, being sure not to lower the dumbbells below chest level.
                   Incline Dumbbell Press
Start

Lie squarely on an incline bench, which should be set at a fairly low
angle (less than 45 degrees). Hold the dumbbells just outside your
shoulders with your elbows out to your sides and your feet planted flat on
the floor.



Move

Forcefully press the weights up in an arc (coming toward each other at
the top) until your arms are fully extended above your chest. Reverse the
motion, being sure not to lower the dumbbells below chest level.
                  Decline Dumbbell Press
Start
Lie back on a decline bench set to 30 to 40 degrees with your feet
secured under the foot pads. Hold the dumbbells just outside your lower
chest with your elbows out to your sides.



Move

Forcefully press the weights up in an arc (coming toward each other at
the top) until your arms are fully extended above your lower chest or
upper abs.
            One-Arm Dumbbell Bench Press
Start

Grasp a dumbbell and lie faceup on the bench. Hold the dumbbell just
outside your shoulder with your elbow out to your sides. With your other
arm, grasp the side of the bench down by your hip.



Move

Press the dumbbell up until your arm is fully extended above your chest.
Reverse the motion, being sure not to lower the dumbbells below lower
chest level. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat with your
other arm.

Note: You can also do this exercise on the incline or decline bench in a
similar manner.
              Exercise-Ball Dumbbell Press
Start
Grasping two dumbbells, lie with your upper back on an exercise ball
with your feet planted firmly on the floor. Hold the dumbbells just
outside your shoulders with your palms facing forward and your elbows
out to your sides.



Move

Forcefully press the weights up in an arc (coming toward each other at
the top) until your arms are fully extended above your chest. Reverse the
motion, being sure not to lower the dumbbells below chest level.
      Neutral-Grip Flat Bench Dumbbell Press
Start

Grasping two dumbbells, lie on a flat bench and turn your wrists so that
they are toward each other, hands at each side of your torso with the
dumbbells above your body.



Move

Press the dumbbells upward, allowing them to naturally move toward
each other at the top (without touching). Then reverse the move back to
the starting position.
              Reverse-Grip Dumbbell Press
Start

Lie on a flat bench while holding one dumbbell in each hand outside
your chest. Turn your wrists outward so that your palms are pointed
toward your face for the position known as the reverse grip.



Move

Press the dumbbells up and together in an arc over your chest while
maintaining the reverse grip. Then slowly lower the dumbbells back to
the start position and repeat for reps.
Seated Chest Press Machine
Start

Position the handles of the machine so that they line up with your mid-to
lower chest. Sit back in the seat and grab the handles with an overhand
grip.



Move

Press the handles out in front of you until your arms are fully extended
but not locked, then slowly bring the handles back toward your chest
without letting the weights touch the stack. Some machines also offer an
incline chest press version that allows you to mimic the incline bench
press to focus more on the upper chest.
               One-Arm Cable Chest Press
Start

Stand facing away from a pulley cable apparatus with your feet shoulder-
width apart or wider; maintain a slight bend in your knees. If the pulley
height is adjustable, bring it to just above shoulder height. Grasp the
single-handle D-grip with an overhand grip and hold it just outside your
shoulder with your elbow out to your side so that your upper arm forms a
30-to 60-degree angle with your torso.



Move

Forcefully press the handle out in front of you until your arm is fully
extended in front of your chest but your elbow is not locked out. Reverse
the motion, being sure not to return the handle behind the level of your
chest.
               Cable Crossover Chest Press
Start

Attach single-handle D-grip handles to the high pulleys on a cable
crossover apparatus. Stand in the direct center of the machine with one
foot in front of the other and with your knees slightly bent. Grasp the
handles with your palms facing down and keep your elbows slightly bent
and facing up toward the ceiling. Lean slightly forward at the waist.



Move

In a simultaneous downward and inward motion, bring the handles to a
point in front of your midsection, keeping your arms slightly bent. Pause
a moment and squeeze your pec muscles before slowly allowing the
handles to return to the start position.
Cable Crossover Chest Press (From Low Pulleys)
Start
Attach single-handle D-grip handles to the lower pulleys on a cable
crossover apparatus. Stand in the direct center of the apparatus with one
foot in front of the other with your knees slightly bent. Grasp the handles
with your palms facing up and keep your elbows bent and facing down
toward the floor and behind you. Maintain the arch in your lower back
and keep your chest up.



Move

In a simultaneous upward and inward motion, bring the handles to a
point straight out in front of you so your hands are level with your chin
or higher. Pause a moment and squeeze your pec muscles before slowly
allowing the handles to return to the start position.
                       Cable Bench Press
Start

Place a flat bench in the center of a cable crossover apparatus. Lower the
cable pulleys on the lowest setting. Grasp the D-handles in both hands
and lie down onto the bench. Start with your elbows bent and hands
evenly placed on the sides of the chest.



Move

With both hands, press firmly upward, squeezing the pecs and bringing
the handles toward the center line of the body. Slowly lower down and
repeat for reps. You can cross your hands in the top position for better
recruitment of the inner-pec muscles. You can also do this exercise on an
incline or decline bench.
                Standing Band Chest Press
Start

Secure the band at about shoulder height around an immobile object, or
use the door attachment and face away from the door. Make sure that
both lengths of the band on either side are equal. Either place both feet
shoulder-width apart or stagger step with one foot forward and the other
back.



Move

Press the bands out in front of the chest with both arms and bring the
band handles together, squeezing the pecs as you press out, then return to
the start and repeat until you complete the set. This targets more of the
middle and lower pecs. To target more of the upper pecs, attach the band
to a position close to the floor and press the bands up and together in
front of your face.




                           Dumbbell Fly
Start

Lie on a flat bench with your feet flat on the floor and your back pressed
against the pad. Begin by holding the dumbbells with your arms straight
up from your shoulders and the weights directly over your chest. Your
palms should face each other and your elbows should be slightly bent.
Maintain this angle of your elbows throughout the entire exercise.



Move

Slowly lower your arms out to your sides until your wrists come to about
shoulder level or slightly above. Bring your arms back toward the
midline of your body, focusing on using your pec muscles to draw them
back together.




                    Incline Dumbbell Fly
Start

Set an incline bench at a 30-to 45-degree angle. Lie on the bench with
your feet flat on the floor and your back pressed against the pad. Begin
by holding the dumbbells with your arms straight up from your shoulders
and the dumbbells directly over your upper chest. Your palms should face
each other and your elbows should be slightly bent. Maintain this angle
of your elbows throughout the entire exercise.



Move

Slowly lower your arms out to your sides until your wrists come to about
shoulder level or slightly above. Bring your arms back toward the
midline of your body, focusing on using your pec muscles to draw them
back together.
                    Decline Dumbbell Fly
Start

Set an decline bench at a 30-to 40-degree angle. Lie on the bench with
your feet secured under the ankle pads and your back pressed against the
pad. Begin by holding the dumbbells with your arms straight up from
your shoulders and the dumbbells directly over your lower chest. Your
palms should face each other and your elbows should be slightly bent.
Maintain this angle of your elbows throughout the entire exercise.



Move

Slowly lower your arms out to your sides until your wrists come to about
shoulder level or slightly above. Bring your arms back toward the
midline of your body, focusing on using your pec muscles to draw them
back together.
                Exercise-Ball Dumbbell Fly
Start

This exercise is similar to the fly on the flat bench except that here your
body works harder to keep you stabilized. Grab two dumbbells and lie
back on a ball so that you face the ceiling. Your feet should be firmly
planted on the floor about shoulder-width apart. Begin by holding the
dumbbells with your arms straight up from your shoulders and the
weights directly over your chest. Your palms should face each other and
your elbows should be slightly bent. Maintain this angle of your elbows
throughout the entire exercise.



Move

Slowly lower your arms out to your sides until your wrists come to about
shoulder level or slightly above. Bring your arms back toward the
midline of your body, focusing on using your pec muscles to draw them
back together.
            Leaning One-Arm Dumbbell Fly
Start

Take a dumbbell in one hand; with the opposite hand, grasp a secure post
such as that on a power rack or cable apparatus. Lean out at about a 45-
degree angle away from the rack and let the hand with the dumbbell hang
to the floor.



Move

Keep the working arm straight with just a slight bend in the elbow. Raise
the dumbbell in an upward fashion toward the opposite shoulder,
squeezing the pecs at the top of the movement and then slowly lowering
the dumbbell back to the start position. Repeat for reps on one arm and
then on the other arm.
                             Cable Fly
Start

Connect two of the single-handle D-grips to the low pulleys of a cable
crossover apparatus. Position the bench in the middle of the cable
crossover apparatus so that the cables are in line with your chest. Lie on
the bench with your feet flat on the floor and your back pressed against
the pad. Begin by holding the handles with your arms straight out at your
sides and your palms facing up while maintaining a slight bend in your
elbows.



Move

Use your pecs to bring the arms up and together over your chest until
your hands meet, maintaining the slight bend in your elbows as you do.
Slowly return to the starting position by lowering your arms back out to
your sides until your wrists come to about shoulder level or slightly
above.

Note: You can also do this exercise on an incline bench, decline bench, or
exercise ball in a similar manner.




                        Cable Crossover
Start

Attach single-handle D-grip handles to the upper pulleys on a cable
crossover apparatus. Stand in the direct center of the machine with one
foot in front of the other and your knees slightly bent. Grasp the handles
with your palms facing down, and keep your elbows slightly bent and
pointing up toward the ceiling. Lean slightly forward at the waist.



Move

In a simultaneous downward and inward motion, bring the handles to a
point in the front of your midsection, keeping your arms slightly bent.
Pause a moment and squeeze your pec muscles before slowly allowing
the handles to return to the starting position.
               Low-Pulley Cable Crossover
Start

Attach single-handle D-grip handles to the lower pulleys on a cable
crossover apparatus. Stand in the direct center of the apparatus with one
foot in front of the other and your knees slightly bent. Grasp the handles
with your palms facing up, and keep your elbows slightly bent and
pointing down toward the floor and behind you. Maintain the arch in
your low back and keep your chest up.



Move

In a simultaneous upward and inward motion, bring the handles to a
point straight out in front of you so that your hands are level with your
forehead. Pause a moment and squeeze your pec muscles before slowly
allowing the handles to return to the starting position.
                            Fly Machine
Start

Adjust the seat so that your shoulders, elbows, and hands are all in line
and your arms are parallel to the floor when you grab the handles. Your
elbows should be slightly bent and pointing behind you and your back
should be flat against the back pad.



Move

Forcefully bring the handles all the way together, making sure to keep
your elbows bent. Squeeze your pecs for a second before reversing the
motion to allow the handles to go back to a point where your hands are
even with your chest.




               One-Arm Standing Band Fly
Start
Although you could do this exercise with both arms, it’s often tough to
find enough space or area to attach two bands at the same height, so the
one-arm version is easier to set up and allows you to focus on each side
better. Attach the band to a secure spot or use a door anchor. Place the
band at about shoulder height. Stand far enough away from the band so
that you have adequate tension at the start of the movement. Hold the
band with your arm extended to the side with a slight bend in your elbow.



Move

Contract your pec to bring your arm across the front of your body before
returning your arm to the start position. Repeat all reps on one arm and
then perform on the other arm. With the band in this position, the focus is
on the middle pec. To target more of the upper pec, lower the attachment
point of the band toward the floor and bring your arm up toward your
face as it crosses your body. To target more of the lower pec, attach the
band higher than shoulder height and bring your arm down toward your
opposite hip as it crosses your body.
                              TRX Fly
Start

Set the TRX at a height that reduces your body weight enough to perform
this tough exercise. Get in the push-up position with your hands in the
TRX handles, palms facing each other, and toes only on the floor.



Move

Maintaining a slight bend in your elbows, extend your arms out to your
sides as wide as you can to stretch the pecs, and lower your body toward
the floor. Then reverse the motion by contracting your pecs to bring your
arms back together, lifting your body weight. Start with a short range of
motion and gradually increase it as you get stronger on this exercise.
                              Push-Up
Start

Lie facedown on the floor with your hands slightly wider than shoulder
width. Your palms should be flat on the floor and your elbows out to your
sides, so your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your torso.
Your body should be straight with just your palms and toes touching the
floor.



Move

Raise your body up by pushing your palms into the floor to fully extend
your arms without locking out the elbows at the top. Reverse the
movement to return your body toward the floor.
                         Incline Push-Up
Start

This is similar to the push-up but with your hands on a bench. Although
this is called the incline push-up, it focuses more on the lower pecs. Also,
because your upper body is raised from the floor, the resistance your
body provides is decreased compared to doing the push-up on the floor.
This makes the incline push-up easier than the standard push-up. Your
hands should be placed firmly on the bench and spaced slightly wider
than shoulder-width apart. Elbows are bent and upper arms are out to
your sides, so your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your
torso. Your body should be extended behind you with just your toes
touching the floor.



Move

Raise your body up by pushing your palms into the bench to fully extend
your arms without locking out the elbows at the top. Reverse the
movement to return your upper body toward the bench.




                         Decline Push-Up
Start

This is similar to the incline push-up, but your body position is reversed.
Although this is called the decline push-up, it focuses more on the upper
pecs. Also, because your lower body is raised from the floor, the
resistance your body provides is increased compared to doing the push-
up on the floor. This makes the decline push-up harder than the standard
push-up. Your hands are placed firmly on the floor and spaced slightly
wider than shoulder-width apart. Elbows are bent and upper arms are out
to your sides, so your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your
torso. Your body should be extended behind you with just your feet up on
the bench and just your toes touching the bench.



Move

Raise your body up by pushing your palms into the floor to fully extend
your arms without locking out the elbows at the top. Reverse the
movement to return your upper body toward the floor.




                     Exercise-Ball Push-Up
Start

This exercise is similar to the incline push-up but uses a ball instead of a
bench. The instability of the exercise ball makes the exercise far more
difficult to perform than the standard push-up and helps to work the
shoulder girdle stabilizer muscles and core. Make sure the ball is fairly
secure and get into push-up position with your hands on the ball and feet
on the floor. Your elbows should be bent with your upper arms out to
your sides.



Move

Keeping your body straight, raise your body up by pushing your palms
into the ball to fully extend your arms without locking out the elbows at
the top. Reverse the movement to return your upper body toward the ball.




                         Power Push-Up
Start

Lie facedown on the floor with your hands slightly wider than shoulder-
width apart. Palms are flat on the floor and elbows are out to your sides,
so your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your torso. Your
body should be straight with just your palms and toes touching the floor.
Move

Raise your body up from the floor by explosively pushing your palms
into the floor to fully extend your arms so that your palms leave the floor.
As you land, allow your elbows to bend and immediately lower your
body back to the floor.




                         Push-Up Ladder
Start

Get in push-up position on the floor near a Smith machine.



Move

Perform push-ups on the floor as described previously until you reach
muscle failure. Immediately move to the bar of the Smith machine set on
the lowest setting and continue doing push-ups with your hands on the
bar and feet on the floor, similar to incline push-ups described previously.
Once you reach muscle failure, raise the bar one notch on the Smith
machine and continue doing push-ups. Continue in this manner doing
push-ups to failure and raising the bar height on the Smith machine by
one notch until the bar is just above waist height.
                          TRX Push-Up
Start

Set the TRX at a height that reduces your body weight enough to perform
this exercise. Get in the push-up position with your hands in the TRX
handles and your feet firmly on the floor.



Move

Bend your elbows like in a normal push-up to lower your body until your
chest is level with the handles. Keep your elbows tucked in slightly so
that your upper arms form a 30-to 60-degree angle with your torso during
this exercise. Reverse the motion by pressing your arms down to lift your
body weight until your arms are fully extended.
                            Chest Dip
Start

Grasp the dip bars with your arms extended and locked. Lean forward
and bend your knees while keeping your legs crossed.



Move

Keep your elbows out to your sides as you bend them to lower your body
down until your upper arms are about parallel to the floor. Press your
hands into the bars to extend your arms and raise your body back up.
                      Dumbbell Pullover
Start

Lie across a flat bench with your upper back supported by the bench and
your feet flat on the floor about shoulder-width apart or wider. Hold the
inside edge of a dumbbell at arm’s length directly over your chest and
drop your hips slightly toward the floor.



Move

Bring your arms back behind your head as far as possible while keeping
a slight bend in your elbows. Reverse the direction and pull the weight
back up over your chest.
                              Chapter 15
                              Shoulders
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the shoulders, or deltoid muscles. The deltoid muscles are divided into the front
(anterior) head, middle (lateral) head, and rear (posterior) head. (See the
diagram.) Although many of these exercises are pressing movements (such as
the barbell overhead press) that are multijoint exercises, requiring the use of the
trapezius and the triceps as well as the deltoids, they are considered primarily
shoulder exercises because of the movement of the upper arms overhead. The
shoulder exercises are divided into pressing exercises, upright row exercises, and
raises. There are also rotator cuff exercises at the end for keeping your shoulder
stabilizers strong and preventing injury, which is an all-too-common problem
among weightlifters with weak rotator cuff muscles. The pressing exercises are
further divided into barbell overhead pressing exercises; dumbbell overhead
pressing exercises; and machine, band, and body-weight overhead pressing
exercises. The upright row exercises are further divided into barbell upright row
exercises, Smith machine upright row exercises, dumbbell upright row exercises,
cable upright row exercises, and band upright row exercises. The raises are
further divided into front raise exercises, lateral raise exercises, and rear deltoid
exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a workout, any one of
the same type can be substituted.




Barbell Overhead Pressing Exercises
    Seated Barbell Overhead Press
    Barbell Overhead Press With Bands
    Seated Barbell Behind-the-Neck Press
    Standing Barbell Overhead Press
    Smith Machine Seated Overhead Press
    Smith Machine Seated Behind-the-Neck Press
    Smith Machine Shoulder Press Throw

Dumbbell Overhead Pressing Exercises
    Seated Dumbbell Overhead Press
    Seated Neutral-Grip Overhead Dumbbell Press
    Arnold Press
    Standing Dumbbell Overhead Press

Machine, Band, and Body-Weight Overhead Pressing Exercise
    Seated Machine Overhead Press
    Band Shoulder Press
    Pike Push-up
    TRX Pike Push-Up

Upright Rowing Exercises
    Barbell Upright Row
    Dumbbell Upright Row
    Smith Machine Upright Row
    One-Arm Smith Machine Upright Row
    Cable Upright Row
    Band Upright Row

Front Raise Exercises
    Barbell Front Raise
    Dumbbell Front Raise
    One-Arm Dumbbell Front Raise
    Weight Plate Front Raise
    Cable Front Raise
    One-Arm Cable Front Raise
    Seated Incline Front Raise
    Prone Incline Front Raise
    Band Front Raise

Lateral Raise Exercises
    Dumbbell Lateral Raise
    One-Arm Dumbbell Lateral Raise
    Seated Dumbbell Lateral Raise
    One-Arm Cable Lateral Raise (Front of Body or Behind)
    Machine Lateral Raise
    Smith Machine Lateral Raise
    Band Lateral Raise

Rear Deltoid Exercises
    Bent-Over Lateral Raise
    One-Arm Bent-Over Lateral Raise
    Incline Bench Rear Lateral Raise
    Standing Cable Reverse Fly
    Lying Cable Reverse Fly
    Cross-Body Rear Deltoid Raise
    Band Bent-Over Lateral Raise
    Band Pull
    One-Arm Band Rear Delt Fly
    Face Pull
    Smith Machine Face Pull

Rotator Cuff Exercises
    Cable External Rotation
    Dumbbell External Rotation
    Cable Internal Rotation
    Dumbbell Internal Rotation
    Empty Can Lift



                Seated Barbell Overhead Press
   Start
Sit on a bench with a vertical back, such as a shoulder press bench, or an
adjustable bench that adjusts to 90 degrees. Plant your feet flat on the
floor and unrack the bar using an overhand grip with your hands slightly
wider than shoulder width on the bar. Bring the bar over and in front of
your head to the starting position—under your chin and just above your
upper chest.



Move

Press the bar straight up overhead until your arms are fully extended but
not locked out. Slowly lower the bar back to the starting position.




          Barbell Overhead Press With Bands
Start

Depending on your setup, either place the bands underneath the bench
and the cuffs around either side of the barbell, or use the straps and place
bands on both sides of the base of the rack and up around either end of
the barbell. Sit on a bench with a vertical back such as a shoulder press
bench or an adjustable bench that adjusts to 90 degrees. Plant your feet
flat on the floor and unrack the bar using an overhand grip with your
hands slightly wider than shoulder width on the bar. Bring the bar over
and in front of your head to the start position—under your chin and just
above your upper chest.



Move

Press the bar straight overhead until your arms are fully extended but not
locked out. Slowly lower the bar to the start position.




        Seated Barbell Behind-the-Neck Press
Start

Sit on a bench with a vertical back, such as a shoulder press bench or an
adjustable bench that adjusts to 90 degrees. Plant your feet flat on the
floor and unrack the bar using an overhand grip with your hands slightly
wider than shoulder width on the bar. Bring the bar behind your head to a
level that is even with the lower part of your ears.



Move

Press the bar straight up overhead and slightly back until your arms are
fully extended but not locked out. Slowly lower the bar back to the
starting position.




            Standing Barbell Overhead Press
Start

Stand holding a barbell with an overhand grip with your hands spaced
just outside shoulder width. Hold the bar just over your upper chest and
below your chin. Your feet should be spaced just slightly wider than
shoulder width and your knees should have a slight bend.
Move

Press the bar straight overhead, stopping just short of elbow lockout.
Then slowly lower the bar back to the starting position.




        Smith Machine Seated Overhead Press
Start

Position an adjustable bench to 90 degrees or use a low-back bench, and
place it within the Smith machine so that the bar lowers just in front of
your face. Sit on the bench with your feet flat on the floor and your back
flat against the bench. Grasp the bar just outside shoulder width and
unlatch it from the safety supports. Lower the bar to just below your
chin.



Move
Contract your shoulders and extend your arms to press the weight up
until your arms are fully extended but not locked out. Slowly lower the
bar back to the starting position.




  Smith Machine Seated Behind-the-Neck Press
Start

Position a low-back bench or an adjustable bench to 90 degrees, and
place it within the Smith machine so that the bar lowers just behind your
head. Sit on the bench with your feet flat on the floor and your back flat
against the bench. Grasp the bar just outside shoulder width and unlatch
it from the safety supports. Lower the bar behind the head to lower-ear
level.



Move

Press the bar straight up overhead until your arms are fully extended but
not locked out. Slowly lower the bar back to the starting position.
        Smith Machine Shoulder Press Throw
Start

Position a low-back bench in the Smith machine so that the bar lowers
just in front of your face. Sit in the bench with your feet flat on the floor
and your back flat against the bench. Grasp the bar just outside shoulder
width and unlatch it from the safety supports. Lower the bar to just below
your chin.



Move

Explosively contract your shoulders and extend your arms as fast as
possible to press the weight up until your arms are fully extended and
throw the bar upward, letting go with both arms. As the bar returns, catch
it and slowly lower the bar back to the start position.
            Seated Dumbbell Overhead Press
Start

Sit on a low-back bench with your feet firmly planted on the floor. Hold
a pair of dumbbells at shoulder height. Begin with your palms facing
forward and your elbows just below shoulder level but slightly forward.
Forearms are angled in slightly so that the inner plates of the dumbbells
are directly above your shoulders.



Move

Push the weights straight up, stopping just short of locking out your
elbows. Then control the dumbbells all the way down until your upper
arms are parallel with the floor or slightly lower and the weights are at
approximately ear level.
 Seated Neutral-Grip Overhead Dumbbell Press
Start

Sit on a low-back bench with your feet firmly planted on the floor. Hold
a pair of dumbbells at shoulder height. Begin with your palms facing
toward each other and your elbows just below shoulder level and directed
forward.



Move

Push the weights straight up, stopping just short of locking out your
elbows. Then control the dumbbells all the way down until your upper
arms are parallel with the floor or slightly lower and your elbows are
pointed forward and the weights are at approximately ear level.
                           Arnold Press
Start

Sit on a low-back bench with your feet firmly planted on the floor. Hold
a pair of dumbbells at shoulder height. Begin with your palms facing
toward your shoulders and your elbows down and forward.



Move

Push the weights straight up, pronating your hands once the dumbbells
reach eye level so that your palms are facing forward at full arm
extension. Control the dumbbells all the way back down in the reverse
motion to the starting position.
Standing Dumbbell Overhead Press
Start

Stand holding a pair of dumbbells at shoulder height with your feet about
shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent. Begin with your palms
facing forward and your elbows just below shoulder level but slightly
forward. Forearms are angled in slightly so that the inner plates of the
dumbbells are directly above your shoulders.



Move

Push the weights straight up, stopping just short of locking out your
elbows. Then control the dumbbells all the way down until your upper
arms are parallel with the floor or slightly lower and the weights are at
approximately ear level.
            Seated Machine Overhead Press
Start

Sit in a seated machine overhead press station with your feet firmly
planted on the floor and your back flat against the seat back. Hold the
machine handles with your palms facing forward and your hands slightly
wider than shoulder-width apart.



Move

Push the handle up overhead to full arm extension, stopping just short of
locking out your elbows. Then control the weight all the way down until
your upper arms are parallel with the floor or slightly lower and the
handle is at approximately ear level.
                     Band Shoulder Press
Start

Stand in a staggered stance with the band placed securely under your
back foot. Make sure that the band has equal lengths on either side. Step
forward with your right foot. Bring the handles up and around behind the
shoulders.



Move

Press straight up until your arms are completely extended but not locked
out at the elbows. Return your arms to the start position and repeat for
reps.
                           Pike Push-up
Start

Place your hands on the floor in a push-up position with your feet up on
something such as a bench or an exercise ball. Flex your hips to lift your
glutes up and place your torso in a perpendicular position with the floor.



Move

Maintaining the bend in your hips, lower your body to the floor until the
top of your head touches the floor and then contract your shoulders to
extend your arms to full extension to lift your body back up.




                      TRX Pike Push-Up
Start

Get in the push-up position with your hands on the floor and your feet in
the TRX stirrups. Flex your hips to lift your glutes up and place your
torso perpendicular with the floor.



Move

Maintaining the bend in your hips, lower your body to the floor until the
top of your head touches the floor and then contract your shoulders to
extend your arms to full extension to lift your body back up.




                     Barbell Upright Row
Start

Stand holding a barbell across the front of your thighs with your feet
shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent. Place your hands wider
than shoulder-width apart.
Move

Lift the bar straight up to chest height, keeping the bar close to your body
and keeping your elbows higher than your wrists at all times. Pause for a
moment at the top when the upper arms are parallel with the floor, and
then slowly lower the bar back to the starting position.




                   Dumbbell Upright Row
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart, holding a pair of dumbbells in
front of your thighs. Palms are facing toward your legs and elbows are
slightly bent.



Move

Bring your elbows up and out to your sides as you lift the dumbbells,
keeping your wrists straight and the dumbbells close to your body. When
your elbows reach shoulder level, hold for a second in the top position
before slowly lowering the dumbbells to the starting position.




               Smith Machine Upright Row
Start
Stand in the middle of a Smith machine, holding the bar with an
overhand grip across the front of your thighs. Your feet are shoulder-
width apart and knees are slightly bent. Place your hands wider than
shoulder-width apart.



Move

Lift the bar up to chest height while keeping your elbows higher than
your wrists at all times. Pause for a moment at the top when the upper
arms are parallel with the floor, and then slowly lower the bar back to the
starting position.




        One-Arm Smith Machine Upright Row
Start

Stand in the middle of a Smith machine with the bar set at about
midthigh height. Grab the bar with your left hand using an overhand grip
with your hand about 4 inches (10 centimeters) to the side of your thigh
and unrack the bar



Move

Pull the bar up to chest height, leading with the elbow that you allow to
flair out to the side as much as possible. This variation places the
majority of the focus on the middle head of the deltoid and is a more
natural movement for the shoulder, which prevents shoulder pain and risk
of injury as can occur when upright rows are performed incorrectly.
Another benefit of this exercise is that because you are using only one
arm, you can focus more on each deltoid working. After finishing all reps
on the left side, repeat on the right side.




                      Cable Upright Row
Start

Stand in front of a pulley cable apparatus holding a straight bar attached
to a low pulley with an overhand grip that is about hip-width to shoulder-
width apart or wider. Your feet should be shoulder-width apart and your
knees are slightly bent. The bar is across the front of your thighs.



Move

Lift the bar up to chest height while keeping your elbows higher than
your wrists at all times. Pause for a moment at the top and then slowly
lower the bar back to the starting position.




                      Band Upright Row
Start

Stand lengthwise on an exercise band with a hip-to shoulder-width
stance. Hold the handles of the bands with an overhand grip and your
hands about shoulder-width apart in front of your legs.



Move

Keeping the band close to your body, pull the handles up to chest level,
or until your upper arms are about parallel with the floor. Hold this top
position for a second and then slowly lower the handles back to the start
position and repeat for reps.




                      Barbell Front Raise
Start

Stand holding a barbell across the front of your thighs. Your feet are
shoulder-width apart and knees are slightly bent. You should have an
overhand grip with your hands about shoulder-width apart.



Move

Lift the bar straight up and out in front of your body until your arms are
just past parallel with the floor. Pause for a moment at the top before
slowly lowering the bar back to the starting position.
                    Dumbbell Front Raise
Start

Stand holding a pair of dumbbells across the front of your thighs. Your
feet are shoulder-width apart and knees are slightly bent. You should
have an overhand grip.



Move

Lift the dumbbells straight up and out in front of your body until your
arms are just past parallel with the floor. Pause for a moment at the top
before slowly lowering the bar back to the starting position. To do
alternating front dumbbell raise, lift one dumbbell up and down at a time,
alternating sides.
            One-Arm Dumbbell Front Raise
Start

Stand holding a dumbbell with one hand across the front of your thigh.
Feet are shoulder-width apart and knees are slightly bent. You should
have an overhand grip.



Move

Lift the dumbbell straight up and out in front of your body until your arm
is just past parallel with the floor. Pause for a moment at the top before
slowly lowering the dumbbell back to the starting position. Perform all
reps on one side and then repeat with the other arm.
                  Weight Plate Front Raise
Start
Stand holding a weight plate by its edges in front of your thighs. Keep
your feet shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent.



Move

Lift the weight plate straight up and out in front of your body until your
arms are just past parallel with the floor. Pause for a moment at the top
before slowly lowering the plate back to the start position.
                       Cable Front Raise
Start
Stand with your back toward a low-pulley cable apparatus. With an
overhand grip, grab onto the straight-bar attachment connected to the low
pulley. The bar should be in front of your thighs with the cable running
through your legs. This can also be done with a rope attachment using a
neutral grip.



Move

In a smooth motion, lift the handle up and straight out in front of you
until your arms are just past parallel with the floor, keeping your arms
straight throughout. Hold for a second and then slowly lower the
attachment back to the starting position.




               One-Arm Cable Front Raise
Start

Stand with your back toward a low-pulley cable apparatus. With one
hand in an overhand grip, grab onto the single-handle D-grip attachment
connected to the low pulley. The handle should be on the side of your
thighs.



Move
In a smooth motion, lift the handle up and straight out in front of you
until your arm is just past parallel with the floor, keeping your arm
straight throughout. Hold for a second and then slowly lower the
attachment back to the starting position.




                 Seated Incline Front Raise
Start

Sit on an incline bench set to 45 degrees while holding a barbell across
your thighs. You should have an overhand grip on the bar using a
shoulder-width grip.



Move

Lift the bar up in front of you until your arms are past parallel with the
floor, keeping your arms straight throughout. Hold for a second and then
slowly lower the bar back to the starting position.
                  Prone Incline Front Raise
Start
Sit in reverse direction straddling an incline bench set to 45 degrees
while holding a barbell with an overhand grip. Your feet should be as flat
as possible on the floor with your chest pressed into the bench and your
chin above the top of the bench. With an overhand grip, hold the barbell
with your hands shoulder-width apart. The barbell should hang straight
down from your shoulders.



Move

Lift the bar up in front of you until your arms are parallel with the floor,
keeping your arms straight throughout. Hold for a second and then
slowly lower the bar back to the starting position.
                        Band Front Raise
Start

Standing upright, place the exercise band underneath both feet and grab
the handles with an overhand grip. Be sure that the band heights on both
sides are fairly even so that you have even resistance on both sides.



Move

Maintaining a slight bend in your elbows, slowly raise both arms up and
out in front of you until your arms are parallel with the floor or higher.
Hold this position for a second as you contract your shoulders as hard as
you can and then slowly lower your arms back to the start position.
Repeat for reps.
                   Dumbbell Lateral Raise
Start

Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart while holding two
dumbbells with neutral grips at your sides.



Move

Slowly raise the dumbbells up and out to your sides. Keep your arms
straight with a very slight bend in your elbows. When your arms reach
just above parallel with the floor, pause in this position for a second
before slowly lowering the dumbbells back to the starting position.
           One-Arm Dumbbell Lateral Raise
Start

Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart while holding one
dumbbell with a neutral grip at your side.



Move

Slowly raise the dumbbell up and out to your side. Keep your arm
straight with a very slight bend in your elbow. When your arm reaches
just above parallel with the floor, pause in this position for a second
before slowly lowering the dumbbell back to the starting position. Repeat
with the other arm.
             Seated Dumbbell Lateral Raise
Start

Sit on a flat bench with your feet firmly planted on the floor while
holding two dumbbells with neutral grips at your sides.



Move

Slowly raise the dumbbells up and out to your sides. Keep your arms
straight with a very slight bend in your elbows. When your arms reach
just above parallel with the floor, pause in this position for a second
before slowly lowering the dumbbells back to the starting position.
One-Arm Cable Lateral Raise (Front of Body or
                 Behind)
Start

Stand with your right shoulder toward a low-pulley cable apparatus. Your
feet should be about shoulder-width apart. Hold a single-handle D-grip
attachment that is attached to the low pulley in your left hand in front of
your left thigh or behind your left thigh.



Move

Slowly raise the handle up and out to your side, keeping your arm
straight with a very slight bend in your elbow. When your arm reaches
just above parallel with the floor, pause in this position for a second
before slowly lowering the handle back to the starting position.
                    Machine Lateral Raise
Start

Sit in a lateral raise machine with your upper arms pressed against the
arm pads of the machine.



Move

Lift your upper arms up and out to your sides until your arms are parallel
with the floor. Pause for a second and then slowly return your arms to the
starting position.
               Smith Machine Lateral Raise
Start

Place light weight on the bar of a Smith machine and set the bar just
above waist height. Stand in the middle of the Smith machine with your
right arm touching the bar. Bend your right arm at the elbow 90 degrees
so that your forearm is parallel with the bar. Unlatch the bar with your
left hand and support the bar with your forearm.



Move

Maintaining the bend at your elbow, raise your arm to lift the bar to about
shoulder height. Hold this position for a second, contracting your deltoid
as hard as possible, then slowly lower the bar back to just above waist
height, keeping the bar in contact with your forearm. Complete all reps
with your right arm and then repeat in the same manner on the left side.
                      Band Lateral Raise
Start

Standing upright, place the exercise band underneath both feet and grab
the handles with a neutral grip. Be sure that the band heights on both
sides are fairly even so that you have even resistance on both sides.



Move

Maintaining a slight bend in your elbows, slowly raise both arms up and
out to your sides until your arms are parallel with the floor or higher.
Hold this position for a second as you contract your shoulders as hard as
you can, and then slowly lower your arms to the start position. Repeat for
reps.




                  Bent-Over Lateral Raise
Start

Stand with your knees slightly bent. Holding a pair of dumbbells in front
of you with your palms facing toward each other, bend forward from the
hips, keeping your back flat and your head in line with your spine. Allow
your arms to hang straight down from your shoulders and bend your
elbows slightly.



Move

Slowly lift the dumbbells up and out to the sides of your body, pulling
through the rear delts and middle traps. Pause a moment at the top of the
motion before slowly lowering the weights back down to the starting
position.




           One-Arm Bent-Over Lateral Raise
Start

Lean forward at the hips, place your right hand on your thigh or a bench
for support, and hold a dumbbell in your left hand with your arm
extended straight down.



Move

Raise the weight straight out to the side until your arm is parallel with the
floor. Pause a moment at the top of the motion before slowly lowering
the weight back down to the starting position. Repeat with the right arm.




            Incline Bench Rear Lateral Raise
Start

Sit in reverse direction straddling an incline bench set below 45 degrees
while holding dumbbells with neutral grips. Your feet should be flat on
the floor or positioned on the frame of the bench to secure your position
with your chest pressed into the bench and your chin above the top of the
bench. Hold the dumbbells so that they hang straight down from your
shoulders.



Move

Slowly lift the dumbbells up and out to the sides of your body, pulling
through the rear delts and middle traps. Pause a moment at the top of the
motion before slowly lowering the weights back down to the starting
position.
                Standing Cable Reverse Fly
Start

Stand in the center of a cable crossover apparatus. Start with hands
crossed in front of you at shoulder height with the left high cable in your
right hand and the right in your left hand.



Move

Using your rear delts, pull your elbows out and back as far as possible,
then return to the starting position.
                  Lying Cable Reverse Fly
Start
Lie faceup on a flat bench placed in the middle of a cable crossover
apparatus. Hold D-handles attached to the high cable pulleys from
opposite sides of the cable apparatus with a neutral grip. Hold your arms
straight out above your chest with a slight bend in your elbows.



Move

Maintain the slight bend in your elbows as you extend at your shoulders
to pull your arms out to your sides until your hands are parallel with your
shoulders. Return the handles to the start position and repeat for reps.
             Cross-Body Rear Deltoid Raise
Start

Lie on a flat bench so that one side of your body is flush against it.
Position your nonworking arm under your body on the bench. Position
your working arm, dumbbell in hand, to hang across your body. Your
elbow is slightly bent and your palm is down.



Move

Contract your shoulder to lift the dumbbell upward. Retrace the
movement back to the starting position.
              Band Bent-Over Lateral Raise
Start

Place an exercise band on the floor in front of your feet. Stand on the
middle of the band with both feet and bend forward from the hips to
reach down and grab the handles with opposite-side hands. In other
words, your right hand should grab the handle extending from your left
foot and your left hand should grab the handle extending from your right
foot. Keep your torso parallel with the floor or slightly higher and
maintain a slight bend in your elbows.



Move

Squeeze your shoulder blades together as you contract your rear deltoids
to extend your arms at the shoulders until your arms are parallel with the
floor or higher. Hold this position for a second as you contract your rear
delts and middle traps as hard as possible and then return your arms to
the start position. Repeat for reps.
                              Band Pull
Start

Hold an exercise band with a shoulder-width grip and arms extended
straight out in front of you.



Move

Contract your rear deltoids and middle traps to pull the band apart until
your arms are out to your sides. Slowly return your hands to the start
position.
               One-Arm Band Rear Delt Fly
Start

Attach the band to a stable post or door attachment at about shoulder
height. Hold the band with a neutral grip and your arm extended straight
out in front of you.



Move

Contract your rear deltoid and middle trap to extend your arm back until
it is out to your side. Return your hand to the start position and repeat all
reps on one side before performing on the other side.
                              Face Pull
Start

Attach a rope to the cable pulley of a lat pulldown station. Grab the ends
of the rope attachment using a neutral grip (palms facing each other) and
place one foot up on the knee-pad post and lean back at about 45 degrees.



Move

Pull the rope toward your face as you spread the ends of the rope so they
end up on the sides of your ears just above your shoulders in the finish
position. Your upper arms should be straight out to your sides with
elbows bent. Hold this position for a second as you squeeze your
shoulder blades together, contracting rear delts and middle traps as hard
as possible. Then slowly return the rope to the start position and repeat
for reps. While this move somewhat mimics a cable row for the lats,
because you are pulling the rope high to your shoulders, it places less
focus on the lats and more on the rear delts and middle traps.




                  Smith Machine Face Pull
Start

Stand in the Smith machine with a shoulder-width stance and bend
forward from the hips so that your torso is just above parallel with the
floor and your neck is lined up over the bar. Using a wider than shoulder-
width grip, grab the bar.



Move

Slowly pull the bar up toward your neck. Hold this position for a second
and then slowly lower the bar to the start and repeat for reps.
                   Cable External Rotation
Start

This exercise is a great way to strengthen the rotator cuff muscles,
particularly the infraspinatus and teres minor muscles. Position a cable
pulley with a D-handle attached to it at waist height. Stand sideways to
the cable so that the working arm is farthest from the pulley. Hold the
cable while keeping a 90-degree bend in your elbow and with your hand
reaching across to the opposite side of your waist.



Move

While maintaining the bend in your elbow, rotate your arm at the
shoulder until you can no longer rotate it. Slowly return the handle to the
start position. Complete all reps with that arm, then switch arms, facing
the opposite direction. You can also do this with bands in the same
manner.
                Dumbbell External Rotation
Start

Lie on your side on a flat bench with your nonworking arm lying on the
bench. Your working arm should be bent at 90 degrees and your biceps
should be pressed against your side while you hold a dumbbell directly in
front of your torso.



Move

Keeping your upper arm pressed against your side and your elbow bent,
lift the dumbbell until it is directly above your torso. Return to the start
and repeat for reps. After completing all the reps with one arm, switch to
the other arm.
                   Cable Internal Rotation
Start

This exercise is a good rotator cuff exercise and specifically strengthens
the subscapularis muscle. Position a cable pulley with a D-handle
attached to it at waist height. Stand sideways with the working arm
facing the pulley. Hold the handle in the hand closer to the pulley with
your forearm in line with your abdomen and your arm bent 90 degrees
and elbow in tight to your side.



Move

Keeping your arm bent and your elbow in at your side, slowly pull the
handle across your body until your hand reaches the opposite side of your
waist. Slowly return the handle to the start position. Complete all reps
with that arm, then switch arms, facing the opposite direction. You can
also do this with bands in the same manner.
                Dumbbell Internal Rotation
Start
Lie on your side on a flat bench with your working arm on the bench in
front of you with your upper arm parallel to your torso and your elbow
bent at 90 degrees and pressed against your side while you hold a
dumbbell directly in front of your torso.



Move

Keeping your upper arm pressed against your side and your elbow bent,
lift the dumbbell until it is directly above your torso. Return to the start
and repeat for reps. After completing all the reps with one arm, switch to
the other arm.
                         Empty Can Lift
Start

Standing upright, hold a pair of light dumbbells or weight plates in your
hands in front of your thighs with an overhand grip so that your palms
face your thighs.



Move

Lift your arms up and out to your sides until your arms are parallel with
the floor. In the top position your pinky fingers should be on top and your
thumbs on the bottom.
                             Chapter 16
                               Back
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the back muscles, including the latissimus dorsi (lat), teres major, rhomboids
(just below the trapezius), and the deep spinal erectors. See the diagram for the
location of each muscle. The back exercises are divided into barbell rowing
exercises, dumbbell rowing exercises, cable or band and machine rowing
exercises, body-weight rowing exercises, pull-up and pulldown exercises,
pullover exercises, and low-back exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise
is used in a workout, any one of the same type can be substituted.




Barbell Rowing Exercises
     Barbell Row
     Underhand-Grip Barbell Row
     Pendlay Row
     Supported Barbell Row
    Barbell Row With Bands
    Smith Machine Bent-Over Row
    Smith Machine One-Arm Bent-Over Row
    Smith Machine Power Row
    Barbell Power Row
    T-Bar Row
    Supported T-Bar Row

Dumbbell Rowing Exercises
    Dumbbell Row
    One-Arm Dumbbell Row
    Incline Dumbbell Row
    Dumbbell Power Row

Cable or Band and Machine Rowing Exercises
    Seated Cable Row
    One-Arm Seated Cable Row
    One-Arm Bent-Over Cable Row
    Reverse Incline Bench One-Arm Cable Row
    Incline Bench Cable Row From High Pulley
    Machine Row
    Band Bent-Over Row

Pull-Up and Pulldown Exercises
    Pull-Up
    Chin-Up
    Lat Pulldown
    Reverse-Grip Pulldown
    Behind-the-Neck Pulldown
    One-Arm Pulldown
    Standing Pulldown
    Inverted Row
    TRX Inverted Row
    Band Pulldown
    Band Straight-Arm Pulldown
    Lying Straight-Arm Pulldown
Pullover Exercises
    Straight-Arm Pullover
    Straight-Arm Decline Bench Pullover
    Straight-Arm Pulldown
    One-Arm Straight-Arm Pulldown
    Dumbbell Straight-Arm Pullback

Low-Back Exercises
    Stiff-Leg Deadlift
    Barbell Good Morning
    Back Extension
    Lying Back Extension
    Superman Back Extension



                               Barbell Row
   Start

   Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart with a slight bend in
   your knees. Bend forward from the hips, keeping your torso just above
   parallel to the floor and your chest lifted to maintain the natural arch in
   your back. Take an overhand grip on the bar, hands just outside shoulder
   width.



   Move

   Pull the bar into your lower abs, contract your lats and middle-back
   muscles hard, then slowly lower the bar all the way down to full arm
   extension.
               Underhand-Grip Barbell Row
Start

Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart with a slight bend in
your knees. Bend forward from the hips, keeping your torso just above
parallel to the floor and your chest lifted to maintain the natural arch in
your back. Take an underhand grip on the bar, hands shoulder-width
apart.



Move

Pull the bar into your lower abs, contract your lats and middle-back
muscles hard, then slowly lower the bar all the way down to full arm
extension.
                           Pendlay Row
Start

With your feet shoulder-width apart, bend over from the hips and grasp a
barbell on the floor with an overhand grip. Bend your knees slightly and
make sure that your back is perfectly straight and parallel to the floor.



Move

Maintaining the position of your legs and back, pull the bar up to your
lower chest or upper abs. Hold this position for a second as you squeeze
your lats hard at the top. Lower the bar with control to the floor. Relax
your grip, reset, and repeat.
                   Supported Barbell Row
Start

Adjust an incline bench so that the top of the back pad is about waist
high. Stand behind the bench holding a barbell with an overhand grip just
outside shoulder width. Bend forward from the hips and rest your chest
on the top of the bench and let the barbell hang straight down below your
shoulders. Your feet should be about shoulder-width apart and your knees
should be slightly bent.
Move

Pull the bar in to your lower abs, contract your lats and middle-back
muscles hard, then slowly lower the bar all the way down to full arm
extension.

Note: You can also do this exercise with an underhand grip, as well as
with dumbbells.




                  Barbell Row With Bands
Start

Place the ends of a band onto the ends of a loaded barbell as shown.
Stand on the middle of the band with your feet about shoulder-width
apart with a slight bend in your knees. Bend forward from the hips,
keeping your torso just above parallel to the floor and your chest lifted to
maintain the natural arch in your back. Take an overhand grip on the bar,
hands just outside shoulder width.
Move

Pull the bar into your lower abs, contract your lats and middle-back
muscles hard, then slowly lower the bar all the way down to full arm
extension.




             Smith Machine Bent-Over Row
Start

Stand in a Smith machine with the bar set on the lowest setting. Keep
your feet about shoulder-width apart with a slight bend in your knees.
Bend forward from the hips, keeping your torso just above parallel to the
floor and your chest lifted to maintain the natural arch in your back. Take
an overhand grip on the bar, hands just outside shoulder width.



Move

Pull the bar in to your lower abs, contract your lats and middle-back
muscles hard, then slowly lower the bar all the way down to full arm
extension.

Note: You can also do this exercise with an underhand grip.




     Smith Machine One-Arm Bent-Over Row
Start

Stand sideways in the middle of the Smith machine with the bar set on
the lowest setting and on the side of your right leg. Stand in a staggered
stance with your left leg in front of your right and a slight bend in your
knees. Bend forward from the hips, keeping your torso just above parallel
to the floor and your chest lifted to maintain the natural arch in your
back. Rest your left hand on your lower thigh for support. Grab the bar in
the middle with your right hand.



Move

Pull the bar up as high as possible as you contract your lats and middle-
back muscles hard, then slowly lower the bar all the way down to full
arm extension. Complete all reps with the right arm, then repeat on the
left side.




                 Smith Machine Power Row
Start

Stand sideways in the middle of the Smith machine so that the outside of
your right leg is almost touching the bar. Bend forward from the hips so
that your torso is at about a 45-degree angle with the floor. Grab the
middle of the bar with your right hand using an open grip (thumb on
same side as fingers).



Move

Use your legs, hips, and lower back to generate the initial power that will
transfer to your lats and arm to pull the bar up as high as possible. Let go
of the bar in the top position and then grab it as it starts its descent back
to the start position. Repeat for reps, completing all reps on the right side
and then switching your position to repeat on the left side.
                       Barbell Power Row
Start

Stand in a power rack with a barbell resting on the safety pins set just
above knee height. Keep your feet about shoulder-width apart with a
slight bend in your knees. Bend forward from the hips, keeping your
torso just above parallel to the floor and your chest lifted to maintain the
natural arch in your back. Take an overhand grip on the bar, hands just
outside shoulder width.



Move

With a fast and powerful move, pull the bar up to your waist and lower it
back to the pins. Pause for several seconds with the bar on the pins
before doing another rep.

Note: You can also do this exercise with an underhand grip.




                            T-Bar Row
Start

With your feet shoulder-width apart and your knees slightly bent, grab
the handles with an open grip. Bend at the hips and keep your back
arched throughout the movement.
Move

Pull the bar all the way to your chest and pause at the top before lowering
to a full stretch at the bottom.




                    Supported T-Bar Row
Start

Lie on the pad of the T-bar row machine with your chest supported and
your feet firmly planted on the foot platform. Take a wide, overhand grip
on the handles and unhook the bar from the rack and support it with your
arms hanging down at full extension.



Move
Pull the bar as high as the apparatus will allow and pause at the top
before lowering to a full stretch at the bottom.




                          Dumbbell Row
Start

Holding two dumbbells with a neutral grip, stand with your feet about
shoulder-width apart while maintaining a slight bend in your knees. Bend
forward from the hips, keeping your torso just above parallel to the floor
and your chest lifted to maintain the natural arch in your back. Allow the
dumbbells to hang straight down below your shoulders.



Move

Pull the dumbbells to your sides as high as possible while contracting
your lats and middle-back muscles hard. Then slowly lower the
dumbbells all the way down to full arm extension.
                  One-Arm Dumbbell Row
Start

Grasp a dumbbell in one hand and rest your free hand and same side leg
on a bench. Keep your chest slightly lifted as you bend forward from the
hips. Keep the other foot flat on the ground for balance.



Move

Keeping your torso stable throughout the movement, pull the dumbbell
all the way up to your side, lifting your elbow as high as possible. Then
lower the dumbbell straight down to the starting position.
                    Incline Dumbbell Row
Start

Grasp a dumbbell in each hand and straddle an incline bench set below
45 degrees. Your chest should be supported by the bench with your chin
above the top. Let the dumbbells hang directly below your shoulders.



Move

With your palms facing each other and your elbows close to your body,
pull the weights as high as possible, squeezing your shoulder blades
together at the top. Hold this position for a second before returning the
dumbbells to the start position.
                     Dumbbell Power Row
Start

Place a dumbbell on the floor between your feet. Your legs should be
about shoulder-width apart and your knees should be bent so that your
thighs are just above parallel with the floor. With your left hand, grasp
the dumbbell with an overhand grip and place your right hand firmly
above your right knee to brace your upper body.



Move

Start the movement by forcefully extending your knees and hips to lift
the dumbbell from the floor, and then pull the dumbbell up toward your
left hip by pulling your elbow as high as possible. Your grip should turn
so that when the dumbbell is at the top your palm is facing your torso
(neutral grip). Slowly lower the dumbbell back to the floor in the
opposite manner you lifted it. After finishing the desired number of reps,
repeat on the right side.
        Seated Cable Row
Start
Sit on the cable row bench with your feet firmly planted on the foot plate.
Grab a low row bar attached to the cable pulley. Keep your knees slightly
bent and your back straight. Maintain a slight arch in your low back and
keep your chest out.



Move

Pull the handle toward your midsection, focusing on driving your elbows
back until the handle touches your lower abdomen. After squeezing your
shoulder blades together at the peak of contraction, slowly return to the
starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an overhand or underhand grip on a
lat bar.




               One-Arm Seated Cable Row
Start
Sit on the cable row bench so that your right leg is supported on the
bench and your right foot is firmly planted on the foot platform. Your left
leg should be bent and firmly planted on the floor. Grab a single-handle
D-grip attached to the cable pulley. Keep your right knee slightly bent
and your back straight. Maintain a slight arch in your lower back and
keep your chest out.



Move

Pull the handle toward your side, focusing on driving your elbow back as
far as possible. Slowly return to the starting position. After completing
the desired number of reps, repeat on the left side.




             One-Arm Bent-Over Cable Row
Start

Grasp a single-handle D-grip attached to a low pulley with your left palm
facing your body. Lean forward about 45 degrees. Use a split stance: The
left foot should be back while the right is forward. Or use a shoulder-
width stance if it feels more stable. Keep your chest up and shoulders
squared. Maintain a slight arch in your back.



Move

Pull the handle in to the left side of your waist until your elbow is past
your body. When you return to the starting position, go for a deep stretch.
Complete the desired number of reps and repeat on the right side.




    Reverse Incline Bench One-Arm Cable Row
Start

Place an incline bench next to a pulley apparatus so that the higher end is
near the low pulley and to the right. Set the angle at about 45 to 60
degrees. Grasp the single-handle D-grip attachment attached to the low
pulley with your left hand. Sit straddling the bench and facing the weight
stack. Place your right hand on top of the bench to support your upper
body while extending your left arm straight out in front of you.



Move

Pull on the handle, moving your elbow straight back as far as possible.
Squeeze your shoulder blades together as you contract your lats briefly
before returning to the starting position.




    Incline Bench Cable Row From High Pulley
Start

Place an incline bench (set to 45 degrees) about a foot from a high-pulley
cable apparatus. Grab a straight bar attached to the high pulley and sit
down on the bench. Your feet are flat on the floor and your back is flat
against the bench. Extend your arms in front of you so that they follow
the line of the cable.



Move
Pull the handle to your abdomen as you squeeze your shoulder blades
together. Contract your lats briefly before returning the bar to the starting
position.

Note: You can do this exercise with a low row bar or a rope attachment,
and you can do it unilaterally using a single-handle D-grip attachment.




                           Machine Row
Start

Adjust the seat of the machine row so that your arms are parallel to the
floor when you grab the handles. Adjust the chest pad so that the weight
plates do not touch the bottom of the stack when you hold the handles
with full arm extension. With your feet flat on the floor, keep your chest
pressed against the chest pad while keeping your back straight.



Move

Pull the handles toward your ribs, bringing your elbows back as far as
possible as you squeeze your shoulder blades together and you contract
your lats briefly. Slowly return the handle to the starting position with
your arms fully extended.

Note: You can also do this exercise unilaterally.




                     Band Bent-Over Row
Start

Stand on an exercise band with your right foot. Get in a staggered stance
with your right leg in front of your left and hold the handle of the band
with a neutral grip and your right arm extended straight down. You can
hold the other end of the band with your left hand to stabilize the band.
Bend forward slightly at the hips.



Move

Pull the band up as high as possible with your right arm. Hold the top
position for a second while contracting your lats as hard as possible
before slowly returning the handle to the start position. Complete all reps
on the right side and then repeat on the left.




                                Pull-Up
Start

Using an overhand grip, grab on to a chin-up bar with your hands spaced
wider than shoulder-width apart. Hang from the bar with your arms fully
extended and your chest high while exaggerating the arch in your lower
back.



Move

Pull yourself up by squeezing your shoulder blades together and
contracting your lats until your chin passes the bar. Hold the contraction
at the top for a second before slowly lowering yourself back to the
starting position.
Note: You can do this exercise with the hands closer together on the bar.




                              Chin-Up
Start

Using an underhand grip, grab on to a chin-up bar with your hands
spaced shoulder-width apart. Hang from the bar with your arms fully
extended and your chest high while exaggerating the arch in your low
back.



Move

Pull yourself up by squeezing your shoulder blades together and
contracting your lats until your chin passes the bar. Hold the contraction
at the top for a second before slowly lowering yourself back to the
starting position.




                           Lat Pulldown
Start

Take an overhand grip that is wider than shoulder width on a lat bar
attached to the pulley on the lat pulldown apparatus. Position yourself
with your feet flat on the floor, chest up, and low-back arch exaggerated.



Move
Pull your shoulder blades together as you squeeze your lats to initiate the
movement, pulling the bar down in a smooth motion to your midsection.
Hold the contraction for a moment, then slowly return the bar all the way
back to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with the hands closer together on the bar.




                   Reverse-Grip Pulldown
Start

Take an underhand grip with your hands spaced about shoulder-width on
a lat bar or straight bar attached to the pulley on the lat pulldown
apparatus. Position yourself on the seat with your feet flat on the floor,
arms extended overhead, chest up, and low-back arch exaggerated.
Move

Pull your shoulder blades together as you squeeze your lats to initiate the
movement, pulling the bar down in a smooth motion to your chest. Hold
the contraction for a moment, then slowly return the bar all the way back
to the starting position.




                 Behind-the-Neck Pulldown
Start

Take an overhand grip that is wider than shoulder width on a lat bar
attached to the pulley on the lat pulldown apparatus. Position yourself on
the seat with your feet flat on the floor, arms extended overhead, and
back leaning slightly forward.
Move
Pull your shoulder blades together as you squeeze your lats to initiate the
movement, pulling the bar down in a smooth motion to the back of your
neck. Hold the contraction for a moment, then slowly return the bar all
the way back to the starting position.




                      One-Arm Pulldown
Start

Sit side saddle on the pulldown seat with your left arm closest to the
pulley station. Grab a D-handle with your left hand using an overhand or
neutral grip.



Move
Pull the handle down to the outside of your left shoulder, bringing your
elbow down toward your hip. Hold the contraction for a second before
returning the handle to the starting position. Repeat all reps on the left
side and then perform on the right side.




                       Standing Pulldown
Start

Stand at a pulldown station and place one foot up on the seat or on the
knee pad as you hold on to the bar attachment with an overhand grip and
lean back slightly while keeping your back arched and your chest up.



Move

Use your lats to pull the bar down to your chest and hold this position as
you squeeze your shoulder blades together and flex your lats. Then return
the bar to the start position and repeat for reps.
                          Inverted Row
Start

Set the bar of a Smith machine or a power rack, just below hip height.
Hold on to the bar using a shoulder-width, overhand grip and allow your
body to hang below the bar with your body straight and your heels
supported on the floor. This will look like an upside-down push-up
position.



Move

Perform inverted rows by pulling your chest to the bar and then slowly
lowering your body to the start position. To add resistance, wear a weight
vest or place a weight plate on your chest.
                       TRX Inverted Row
Start

Set the handles of the TRX just below hip height. Hold on to the handles
using a neutral grip and allow your body to hang below the bar with your
body straight and heels supported on the floor. This will look like an
upside-down push-up position.



Move

Perform inverted rows by using your lats to pull your elbows down past
your sides, lifting your body up and then slowly lowering your body to
the start position. To add resistance, wear a weight vest or place a weight
plate on your chest.
                         Band Pulldown
Start

Attach a band to a high stable crossbar or the top of the door attachment.
Kneel down so that there is adequate tension on the bands when you hold
the handles with your arms directly overhead. Alternatively, you can hold
the bands directly without attaching handles to minimize the length of the
bands, as seen in the photo.



Move

Pull the handles down to the outsides of your shoulders and hold this
position for a second while focusing on contracting the lats. Slowly
return the handles to the start position.
               Band Straight-Arm Pulldown
Start

Attach a band to a high stable crossbar or the top of the door attachment.
If you need to, kneel down so there is adequate tension on the bands
when you hold the handles with your arms extended directly out in front
of your chest.



Move

Keeping your arms straight, pull the handles down past your hips and
hold this position for a second while focusing on contracting the lats.
Slowly return the handles to the start position.
              Lying Straight-Arm Pulldown
Start

Lie on your back either on the floor or on a bench set lengthwise in a
cable crossover apparatus with the pulley stationed above your head. If
the pulley height is adjustable, lower it so that it is just above arm’s
reach. Grab a straight bar attached to the pulley with an overhand grip
and your arms extended directly above you.



Move

Contract your lats as you keep your arms straight with a slight bend in
your elbows to pull the bar down to your thighs. Hold this position for a
second as you contract your lats as hard as possible before returning the
bar to the start position.
                    Straight-Arm Pullover
Start

Lie on a flat bench with your feet flat on the floor and your head close to
the end of the bench. Hold a straight bar or EZ curl bar with an overhand
grip spaced shoulder-width apart and arms extended straight over your
chest. Maintain a slight bend in your elbows throughout the entire
exercise.



Move

Lower your arms back and down over your head until they are just below
parallel to the floor. Pull the bar back up with straight arms until the bar
is back over your chest.
         Straight-Arm Decline Bench Pullover
Start

Lie on a decline bench with your feet secured under the foot pads and
your head close to the end of the bench. Hold a straight bar or EZ curl
bar with an overhand grip spaced shoulder-width apart and arms
extended straight up over your abs. Maintain a slight bend in your elbows
throughout the entire exercise.



Move

Lower your arms back and down over your head as far as possible, then
pull the bar back up with straight arms until the bar is back over your abs.
                   Straight-Arm Pulldown
Start

Stand behind the bench of a lat pulldown apparatus with your feet hip-
width to shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent. Grab the lat bar
with an overhand grip and your arms shoulder-width apart. In this
position your arms should be extended straight out in front of you,
forming about a 45-degree angle to the floor.



Move

Pull your arms down to bring the bar to your upper thighs while
maintaining a slight bend in your elbows. Squeeze your lats hard in this
position and slowly return the bar back to the starting position.
           One-Arm Straight-Arm Pulldown
Start

Stand about a foot (30.5 to 61 centimeters) or two away from a high-
pulley cable so that your right arm is lined up with the pulley. Your feet
should be hip-width to shoulder-width apart and your knees slightly bent.
Grab a single-handle D-grip with an overhand grip. In this position your
arm should be extended straight out in front of you, forming about a 45-
degree angle to the floor.



Move

Pull your arm down to bring the handle to the side of your thigh while
maintaining a slight bend in your elbow. Hold the contraction for a
second before slowly returning the handle back to the starting position.
Perform the desired number of reps and repeat on the left side.
            Dumbbell Straight-Arm Pullback
Start

Stand with your knees slightly bent and shoulder-width apart. Hold a
dumbbell in your left hand with an overhand grip. Bend over from the
hips until your back is just above parallel with the floor. Place your right
hand on your lower thigh for support. Let the dumbbell hang straight
down below your shoulder.



Move

Maintaining a straight arm, pull your arm back and up to your side until
it is parallel with the floor. Then slowly return your arm to the starting
position. Complete all reps with the left arm, then repeat with the right
arm.




                        Stiff-Leg Deadlift
Start

Stand with feet hip-width to shoulder-width apart. With hands in an
overhand or staggered grip and spaced shoulder-width apart, hold a
loaded barbell in front of your thighs.



Move

Bend over at the waist as you lower the bar in front of your legs down
toward your ankles. Pause briefly before lifting your torso back up to a
standing position.

Note: This exercise is different from the Romanian deadlift, which uses
more movement at the hips than at the lower back and involves the
hamstrings and glutes as the primary movers.




                    Barbell Good Morning
Start

Stand with a barbell resting across your traps in a shoulder-width grip.
Move

Keeping your knees slightly bent, lean forward at the hips until your
torso is almost parallel to the ground. Return to the starting position.




                          Back Extension
Start

Lie facedown on a back extension bench with your heels under the
footpads and your hips resting on the bench. Keep your body straight and
your hands crossed over your chest.



Move

Lower your torso by bending at the waist to form an angle at your hips
that approaches about 90 degrees. Use a smooth motion to rise back up to
the starting position.




                    Lying Back Extension
Start

Lie facedown on the floor with your arms extended in front of you.



Move

Raise your chest, shoulders, and arms off the floor as high as possible
and hold for the desired amount of time.
                 Superman Back Extension
Start

Lie facedown on the floor with your arms extended in front of you.



Move

Simultaneously raise your chest, shoulders, arms, and legs off the floor as
high as possible and hold for the desired amount of time.
                            Chapter 17
                            Trapezius
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the trapezius (trap) muscles, including the upper-, middle-, and lower-trapezius
muscle fibers. See the diagram for a detailed location of each of these areas of
the trapezius muscle. The traps exercises are divided into barbell and Smith
machine shrugging exercises; dumbbell shrugging exercises; cable, band, and
machine shrugging exercises; and lower-trapezius exercises. Wherever a certain
type of exercise is used in a workout, any one of the same type can be
substituted.




Barbell and Smith Machine Shrugging Exercises
     Barbell Shrug
     Behind-the-Back Barbell Shrug
     Barbell Shrug With Bands
     Smith Machine Shrug
    Smith Machine Behind-the-Back Shrug
    Smith Machine One-Arm Shrug
    Barbell Power Shrug

Dumbbell Shrugging Exercises
    Dumbbell Shrug
    Seated Dumbbell Shrug
    One-Arm Dumbbell Shrug
    Prone Incline Bench Dumbbell Shrug

Cable, Band, and Machine Shrugging Exercises
    Cable Shrug
    One-Arm Cable Shrug
    Prone Incline Cable Shrug
    Standing Calf Machine Shrug
    Band Shrug

Lower-Trapezius Exercises
    Straight-Arm Dip
    Behind-the-Back Smith Machine Straight-Arm Dip
    Straight-Arm Pressdown
    Y-Raise
    One-Arm Cable Y-Raise
    Standing Band Y-Raise



                            Barbell Shrug
   Start

   Stand while holding a barbell with an overhand grip in front of your
   thighs. Both your hands and your feet should be shoulder-width apart.



   Move
Lift your shoulders up toward your ears as high as possible while keeping
your arms straight. Hold the contraction for a second before lowering the
bar back to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with a staggered grip (one hand using an
overhand grip and the other using an underhand grip).




             Behind-the-Back Barbell Shrug
Start
Stand while holding a barbell with an overhand grip behind your thighs.
Both your hands and your feet should be shoulder-width apart.



Move

Lift your shoulders up toward your ears as high as possible while keeping
your arms straight. Hold the contraction for a second before lowering the
bar back to the starting position.
                 Barbell Shrug With Bands
Start

Attach the ends of an exercise band to the ends of a loaded barbell. Stand
on the middle of the band with a wide stance to provide ample resistance
from the bands. Grab the barbell with an overhand, shoulder-width grip
and lift the barbell off the floor to get in a normal barbell shrug start
position.



Move

Use your traps to pull your shoulders up as high as possible and lower
your shoulders to the start position.
                    Smith Machine Shrug
Start

Stand in a Smith machine holding the unlatched bar with an overhand
grip in front of your thighs. Both your hands and your feet should be
shoulder-width apart.



Move

Lift your shoulders up toward your ears as high as possible while keeping
your arms straight. Hold the contraction for a second before lowering the
bar back to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with a staggered grip (one hand using an
overhand grip and the other using an underhand grip).
        Smith Machine Behind-the-Back Shrug
Start

Stand in a Smith machine holding the unlatched bar with an overhand
grip in back of your thighs. Both your hands and your feet should be
shoulder-width apart.



Move

Lift your shoulders up toward your ears as high as possible while keeping
your arms straight. Hold the contraction for a second before lowering the
bar back to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with a staggered grip (one hand using an
overhand grip and the other using an underhand grip).
             Smith Machine One-Arm Shrug
Start

Stand in a Smith machine with your right side toward the bar. With your
feet shoulder-width apart and your knees slightly bent, grab the bar in the
middle with your right hand and unlatch it.



Move

Lift your shoulder up toward your ear as high as possible while keeping
your arm straight. Hold the contraction for a second before lowering the
bar back to the starting position. Complete the desired number of reps
and repeat on the left side.
                    Barbell Power Shrug
Start

Stand while holding a barbell with an overhand grip in front of your
thighs. Both your hands and your feet should be shoulder-width apart.



Move

Quickly bend down a little at the knees and immediately reverse that
motion, exploding up with your thighs and calves while simultaneously
shrugging your shoulders up toward your ears as high as possible while
keeping your arms straight. Immediately lower the weight back to the
starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with a staggered grip (one hand using an
overhand grip and the other using an underhand grip).
                        Dumbbell Shrug
Start

Stand with feet shoulder-width apart while holding a pair of dumbbells at
your sides.



Move

Slowly shrug your shoulders up toward your ears. At the top, pause for a
moment and contract hard through your traps before slowly lowering the
weights back to the starting position.
                    Seated Dumbbell Shrug
Start

Sit on a flat bench with your feet flat on the floor in front of you. Hold a
pair of dumbbells with a neutral grip at your sides.



Move

Slowly shrug your shoulders up toward your ears. At the top, pause for a
moment and contract hard through your traps and rhomboids before
slowly lowering the weights back to the starting position.
                 One-Arm Dumbbell Shrug
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart. Hold a dumbbell in your left
hand at your side.



Move

Slowly shrug your left shoulder up toward your ear. At the top, pause for
a moment and contract the muscles hard before slowly lowering the
weight back to the starting position. After completing all reps on the left
side, repeat on the right side.
         Prone Incline Bench Dumbbell Shrug
Start

Grab a pair of dumbbells and straddle an adjustable-incline bench with
your feet flat on the floor, or position them on the bench frame to support
your body. Hold the dumbbells with a neutral grip at your sides.



Move

Slowly shrug your shoulders up toward your ears. At the top, pause for a
moment and contract hard through your traps and rhomboids before
slowly lowering the weights back to the starting position.
                           Cable Shrug
Start

With feet shoulder-width apart, stand in front of a low-pulley cable while
holding a straight bar attached to the low pulley.



Move

Slowly shrug your shoulders up toward your ears. At the top, pause for a
moment and contract hard through your traps before slowly lowering the
bar back to the starting position.
                   One-Arm Cable Shrug
Start

Stand with your right side toward a low-pulley cable and maintain a
shoulder-width stance while holding a single-handle D-grip in your right
hand.



Move

Shrug your right shoulder up toward your ear. At the top, pause for a
moment and contract the muscles hard before slowly lowering the handle
back to the starting position.
                 Prone Incline Cable Shrug
Start

Place an incline bench next to a pulley apparatus so that the higher end is
near the low pulley and to the right. Set the angle at about 45 degrees or
higher. With your left hand, grasp the single-handle D-grip attached to
the low pulley. Sit straddling the bench and facing the weight stack. Lean
against the bench to support your chest while extending your arm
forward and down with a neutral grip.



Move

Slowly shrug your left shoulder up and back. At the top, pause for a
moment and contract the muscles hard before slowly lowering the handle
back to the starting position. Complete the desired number of reps and
then repeat with the right arm.
              Standing Calf Machine Shrug
Start

Stand in the standing calf machine with the pads on your shoulders and a
slight bend in your knees. Allow the weight of the stack to drop your
shoulders as low as possible to stretch the traps.



Move

Use your traps to shrug your shoulders up as high as possible. Hold this
position for a second and then slowly lower your shoulders and repeat for
reps.
                           Band Shrug
Start

Stand on top of an exercise band with both feet using a shoulder-width
stance or wider to provide adequate resistance from the bands. Hold the
handles of the band with a neutral grip with your arms extended down at
the sides of your thighs.



Move

Contract your traps to shrug your shoulders up as high as possible. Hold
the top position for a second as you contract your traps. Slowly lower
your shoulders and repeat for reps




                       Straight-Arm Dip
Start

Support your body on the dip bars with your arms straight and almost
locked out.



Move

Without bending your elbows, allow your body to sink as low as you can
and then use your lower traps to pull your scapulae down, which will
raise your body up. Try to raise your body as high as possible and then
lower it and repeat.
 Behind-the-Back Smith Machine Straight-Arm
                    Dip
Start

Set the bar of the Smith machine at a height so that when you sit back on
the bar with your feet on the floor and place your hands on the bar your
arms are straight and your shoulders are as high as possible.



Move

Keep your arms straight, contract your lower traps to depress your
scapulae, and lift your body as high as possible, leaning the back of your
legs against the bar for balance. Hold the top position for a second as you
focus on contracting your lower traps and then lower your feet to the
floor and repeat for reps. To increase the resistance, wear a weight vest or
chain belt with weight plates attached.
                  Straight-Arm Pressdown
Start

Attach a wide straight bar to a cable pulley and set the bar just below
waist height. Stand with the bar behind your back and place your hands
on the bar with an overhand, shoulder-width grip. Extend your arms so
that your elbows are locked out. Without bending your elbows, allow the
weight from the pulley station to raise your shoulders as high as possible.
This is the start position.



Move

Use your lower traps to pull your shoulder blades down and together to
lower your shoulders as much as possible. Hold this position for a
second, focusing on contracting your lower traps as hard as possible
before relaxing them and allowing your shoulders to rise to the start
position.
Y-Raise
Start

Lie facedown on a flat bench with your chin past the end of the bench.
Hold two light dumbbells or weight plates with a neutral grip down
toward the floor.



Move

Lift both dumbbells up as high as you can while forming a letter Y with
your arms and torso. Hold this position for two seconds before returning
the dumbbells to the starting position.




                   One-Arm Cable Y-Raise
Start

Attach a rope handle to a low cable pulley. Stand facing the cable pulley
as you hold the rope handle with a hammer grip and your arm extended
straight out in front of you. Alternatively, you can just hold onto the end
of the cable without an attachment, as shown in the photo.
Move

Keeping your arm straight, but allowing a slight bend in your elbow,
raise the handle above your head. Your arm should make about a 30-
degree angle with your head in the top position. Hold the top position for
a second and then slowly return the handle to the start position. Perform
all reps on one side and then repeat with the other arm.




                   Standing Band Y-Raise
Start

Wrap a band around a stable structure so that both ends of the band are at
about shoulder height. Hold the handles with a neutral grip (palms facing
each other). Alternatively, you can hold the ends of the bands without
attachments, as shown in the photo.
Move

While keeping your arms straight at the elbows, extend your arms
straight up as high as possible so that they form about a 30-degree angle
with your head. Slowly return your arms to the start position and repeat
for reps.
                             Chapter 18
                              Triceps
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the triceps muscles, including the lateral head, long head, and medial head. See
the diagram for the location of each of theses triceps heads. The triceps exercises
are divided into pressing, dip, and push-up exercises; pressdown and kickback
exercises; lying and machine triceps extension exercises; and overhead triceps
extension exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a workout,
any one of the same type can be substituted.




Pressing, Dip, and Push-Up Exercises
     Close-Grip Bench Press
     Reverse-Grip Close-Grip Bench Press
     Close-Grip Dumbbell Press
     Triceps Dip
     Bench Dip
    Machine Dip
    Close-Grip Push-Up
    Close-Grip Push-Up Ladder

Pressdown and Kickback Exercises
    Triceps Pressdown
    One-Arm Cable Pressdown
    Reverse-Grip Cable Pressdown
    One-Arm Reverse-Grip Cable Pressdown
    Cross-Body Cable Triceps Pressdown
    Band Triceps Pressdown
    Dumbbell Kickback
    Cable Kickback
    Band Triceps Kickback

Lying and Machine Triceps Extension Exercises
    Lying Triceps Extension
    Decline Triceps Extension
    Dumbbell Lying Triceps Extension
    One-Arm Dumbbell Lying Triceps Extension
    Cable Lying Triceps Extension
    Machine Triceps Extension

Overhead Triceps Extension Exercises
    Overhead Barbell Triceps Extension
    Overhead Dumbbell Triceps Extension
    One-Arm Overhead Dumbbell Triceps Extension
    Incline Overhead Triceps Extension
    Overhead Cable Triceps Extension
    Overhead Cable Triceps Extension (From Low Pulley)
    Band Overhead Triceps Extension
    TRX Triceps Extension



                    Close-Grip Bench Press
Start

Lie faceup on a bench-press bench with your feet flat on the floor. With
your hands shoulder-width apart, grasp the barbell with an overhand grip.

Note: Using anything closer than a shoulder-width grip does not increase
triceps’ involvement but may increase stress on the wrists.



Move
Unrack the bar and slowly lower it to your lower chest, keeping your
elbows as close to your sides as possible. At the bottom of the
movement, your elbows should be a little lower than your shoulders.
Press the bar back up to the start position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar.




        Reverse-Grip Close-Grip Bench Press
Start

Lie faceup on a bench-press bench with your feet flat on the floor. With
your hands shoulder-width apart, grasp the barbell with an underhand
grip.



Move

Have a spotter help you unrack the bar and slowly lower it to your lower
chest, keeping your elbows as close to your sides as possible. At the
bottom of the movement, your elbows should be a little lower than your
shoulders. Press the bar back up to the starting position.




                Close-Grip Dumbbell Press
Start

Lie back on a flat bench, holding two dumbbells at your chest with a
neutral grip.
Move

Press the dumbbells straight overhead until your arms are fully extended.
Flex your triceps hard at the top for a second before bringing the weights
back down toward your chest.




                            Triceps Dip
Start

Grasp the dip bars with your arms extended and locked. Keep your body
as vertical as possible to keep emphasis on the triceps and away from the
chest. If the dip bars are high enough, keep your legs straight below you.



Move
Keep your elbows as close to your sides as possible as you bend them to
lower your body down until your upper arms are about parallel to the
floor. Press your hands forcefully into the bars to extend your arms and
raise your body back up.




                             Bench Dip
Start
Place your hands on the side of a flat bench so that your body is
perpendicular to the bench when you place your feet out in front of you.
Only your heels should be on the floor and your legs should be straight.
Or keep your knees and hips bent to support a weight plate on your
thighs to add resistance. Your arms should be fully extended with just
your palms on the bench.



Move

Bend your elbows to lower your body down until your elbows reach 90
degrees. Extend your arms to lift your body back to the starting position,
flexing your triceps hard at the top.

Note: You can also do this exercise with your heels up on a bench that is
parallel to the other bench. Have a partner load weight plates on your lap
to make it even more difficult.




                           Machine Dip
Start

Sit on the seat of a machine dip with your feet flat on the floor and your
back pressed firmly against the pad. Grasp the handles with an overhand
grip.



Move

With your arms close to your sides throughout (elbows pointed straight
back behind you), press the handles down to full arm extension. Flex
your triceps hard for a second and then slowly bring the handles back up
until your elbows form a 90-degree angle.
                     Close-Grip Push-Up
Start

Lie facedown on the floor in a push-up position, placing your hands a
few inches apart. Raise your body by extending your arms and coming
up on your toes.



Move

With your forehead facing the floor and your abs pulled in, lower your
body by bending your elbows. Stop the motion when your upper arms are
about parallel to the floor, and reverse the movement to the starting
position.
                Close-Grip Push-Up Ladder
Start

Get in the close-grip push-up position, as described earlier, next to a
Smith machine.



Move

After reaching muscle failure, perform close-grip push-up ladders on the
Smith machine bar as described for push-up ladders in chapter 14.
                       Triceps Pressdown
Start

With a slight bend in your knees, stand facing a high-pulley cable with a
pressdown bar attached to it. Your feet should be about shoulder-width
apart. Grasp the pressdown bar with an overhand grip and hold the bar at
chest level with your elbows tight against your sides.



Move

Keeping your elbows stationary, straighten your arms until they are fully
extended. Pause at full arm extension and flex your triceps, then slowly
return the bar to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with a rope, short straight bar, or EZ bar
attachment.
                One-Arm Cable Pressdown
Start

Stand facing a high-pulley cable with a single-handle D-grip attached to
it. Your feet should be about shoulder-width apart and your knees should
be slightly bent. Using an overhand grip, grasp the handle with your left
hand and hold it at chest level with your elbow tight against your side.



Move

Keeping your elbow stationary, straighten your left arm until it is fully
extended. Pause at full arm extension and flex your triceps, then slowly
return the handle to the starting position. Complete as many reps as
desired and then repeat with the right arm.
             Reverse-Grip Cable Pressdown
Start

With a slight bend in your knees, stand facing a high-pulley cable with a
short straight bar attached to it. Your feet should be about shoulder-width
apart. With an underhand grip, grasp the pressdown bar and hold the bar
at chest level with your elbows tight against your sides.



Move

Keeping your elbows stationary, straighten your arms until they are fully
extended. Pause at full arm extension and flex your triceps, then slowly
return the bar to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar attachment.
     One-Arm Reverse-Grip Cable Pressdown
Start

Stand facing a high-pulley cable with a single-handle D-grip attached to
it. Your feet should be about hip-width to shoulder-width apart and your
knees should be slightly bent. Using an underhand grip, grasp the handle
with your left hand and hold it at chest level with your elbow tight
against your side.



Move

Keeping your elbow stationary, straighten your left arm until it is fully
extended. Pause at full arm extension and flex your triceps, then slowly
return the handle to the starting position. Complete as many reps as
desired, then repeat with the right arm.
         Cross-Body Cable Triceps Pressdown
Start

Stand in the middle of a cable crossover apparatus holding in one hand a
rope handle attached to the high pulley or to a pulley set slightly higher
than shoulder height. Start with your upper arm extended to your side
and almost parallel to the floor and your elbow bent so that your hand is
in front of your chest.



Move

Keeping your upper arm stationary, extend your arm at the elbow until it
is fully extended out to your side. Contract the triceps in this final
position before returning your hand to the start. The upper-arm position
this exercise requires takes the shoulder and chest completely out of the
picture and forces you to use just your triceps for better isolation of the
lateral head.
                  Band Triceps Pressdown
Start

Attach a band to a high crossbar or the door attachment set at the top of
the door. Stand back far enough to allow enough resistance from the
bands with your upper arms parallel with your torso and pressed at your
sides and your elbows bent at 90 degrees while holding the handles with
an overhand grip. Alternatively, you can grab onto the bands directly
without handles attached using a neutral grip. If there is not enough
tension on the bands, do these in a kneeling position.



Move

Contract your triceps to extend your arms at the elbow. Bring the handles
down to the sides of your legs. Hold this position for a second while
forcefully contracting your triceps. Then slowly return the handles to the
start position.
                       Dumbbell Kickback
Start

Place your right knee and palm on a flat bench so that your torso is
parallel with the floor. While holding a dumbbell in the left hand and
keeping the left foot flat on the floor, press your left arm tight against
your side with the upper arm parallel to the floor.



Move

Extend at the elbow until your arm is straight back and fully extended.
Flex the triceps hard for a second, then reverse to the starting position.
Complete all reps on the left arm and then repeat on the right.
                         Cable Kickback
Start

Face the weight stack and bend from the waist so that your torso is about
parallel to the floor. With an underhand grip, grasp a single-handle D-
grip attached to a low pulley. Alternatively, you can grab onto the cable
directly without a handle attached using a neutral grip. Raise your elbow
so that your upper arm is parallel to the floor and your elbow is bent 90
degrees and tucked at your side. Brace your right arm on your thigh or on
the pulley cable apparatus.



Move

Extend your arm back and up until your arm is fully extended. Flex the
triceps hard for a second, then reverse to the starting position. Complete
as many reps as desired, then repeat with the right arm.
                    Band Triceps Kickback
Start

Stand in a staggered stance (one foot forward and one back). Stand on the
middle of a band with the back foot. Grab the ends of the band with your
left hand using a neutral grip. Bend forward from the hips and keep your
upper arm parallel with your torso and pressed to your side. Allow your
forearm to hang straight down at a 90-degree angle to your upper arm.



Move

Use your triceps to extend your forearm back until your arm is
completely straight with your elbow locked out. Contract your triceps as
hard as possible in this position, then return the band to the start position.
Complete all reps with your left arm and then repeat with your right arm.
                   Lying Triceps Extension
Start

Lie faceup on a flat bench with your feet flat on the floor or up on the
bench frame for those with shorter legs. Hold a barbell at full arm
extension over your chest.



Move

Keeping your upper arms stationary, lower your lower arms to bring the
bar down to your forehead, then push it back up.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar.
                 Decline Triceps Extension
Start

Lie faceup on an adjustable-decline bench with your feet secured under
the foot pads. Take a shoulder-width, overhand grip on a barbell and lift
it into position over your chest, keeping your arms straight.



Move

Bend your elbows and lower the weight to your forehead, then extend
your arms to return the bar to the starting position.
           Dumbbell Lying Triceps Extension
Start

Lie faceup on a flat bench with your feet flat on the floor. With a neutral
grip, hold a pair of dumbbells at full arm extension over your chest.



Move

Keeping your upper arms stationary, lower your lower arms to bring the
dumbbells to the sides of your head, then push them back up.

Note: You can do this exercise on a decline bench.




   One-Arm Dumbbell Lying Triceps Extension
Start

Lie on a flat bench and hold a dumbbell in your left hand with an
overhand grip. Extend your arm so that the dumbbell is straight up from
your left shoulder.
Move

Without letting your upper arm move, bend at the elbow to bring the
dumbbell down to the side of your head across your body toward the
right shoulder. Either way, stop when your elbow reaches 90 degrees and
reverse the motion to bring the dumbbell back up to full arm extension.
Complete as many reps as desired, then repeat with the right arm.




              Cable Lying Triceps Extension
Start

Lie faceup on the floor or on a bench lengthwise in the middle of a cable
crossover apparatus. Your head is closest to the low-pulley cable. With an
overhand grip, grab a straight bar handle attached to the low pulley and
extend your arms straight over your head.



Move

Keeping your upper arms perpendicular to your torso, lower the bar to
the top of your head. Extend your arms to lift the bar back up to full
extension.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar attachment.
                Machine Triceps Extension
Start

Sit in the seat of a triceps extension machine and place your upper arms
on the arm pads while grasping the handles with your hands.



Move

Use your triceps to extend your arms at just the elbows while keeping
your upper arms in the arm pads. Once your arms have reached full
extension, slowly return the handles to the start position.
         Overhead Barbell Triceps Extension
Start

Sit on a low-back bench and extend a barbell overhead, holding it with a
shoulder-width grip.



Move

Keeping your upper arms right beside your head, lower the bar behind
your head until your elbows form 90-degree angles, then lift it back to
full arm extension.
        Overhead Dumbbell Triceps Extension
Start

Sit on a low-back bench and hoist a dumbbell overhead, holding it with
both hands, palms cupped against the upper inside plates.



Move

Keeping your upper arms right beside your head, lower the dumbbell
behind your head until your elbows form 90-degree angles, then lift it
back to full arm extension.
One-Arm Overhead Dumbbell Triceps Extension
Start

Sit on a low-back bench and lift a dumbbell overhead with your right
hand. Hold it straight overhead with an overhand grip (palm facing
forward).



Move

Keeping your upper arm right beside your head, lower the dumbbell
behind your head and toward your left shoulder until your elbow forms a
90-degree angle, then lift it back to full arm extension.
          Incline Overhead Triceps Extension
Start

Recline on an incline bench set to 45 degrees and raise a barbell
overhead with an overhand grip.



Move

Bend your elbows to begin slowly lowering the bar until it is behind your
head. Push the weights back up to full arm extension.

Note: You can do this exercise with a barbell, one dumbbell, or a pair of
dumbbells.
           Overhead Cable Triceps Extension
Start

Stand with your back to a high pulley with a rope attached to it. With a
neutral grip, grasp the rope just behind your head and stand with your
torso leaning forward. Keep your elbows beside your ears and bring your
forearms back to form a 90-degree angle.



Move

Keep your upper arms stationary as you move only from the elbows to
press the weight to full arm extension.

Note: You can do this exercise with a short straight bar or EZ bar
attachment.
  Overhead Cable Triceps Extension (From Low
                    Pulley)
Start

Stand with your back to a cable pulley set below shoulder height with a
rope attached to it. With a neutral grip, grasp the rope just behind your
head and stand with your torso as upright as possible. Keep your elbows
beside your ears with your upper arms as upright as possible.



Move

Keep your upper arms stationary as you move only from the elbows to
extend the weight to full arm extension overhead.
           Band Overhead Triceps Extension
Start

Stand in a staggered stance (one foot in front and one in back). Stand on
an exercise band with the back foot and hold the handles with an
overhand grip. Bring your upper arms up so that your elbows are at the
sides of your head and elbows are bent with your forearms flexed behind
your head.



Move

Extend your arms just at the elbows, keeping your upper arms stationary
to bring your arms straight overhead. Contract your triceps in this top
position and then slowly return the handles to the start position.
                   TRX Triceps Extension
Start

Hold the TRX handles with an overhand grip. Lean forward and bend
your arms at the elbows so that your arms are bent less than 90 degrees.
Only your toes should be touching the floor. The TRX length should be
adjusted so that your body is leaning forward enough to provide enough
resistance to limit you to the rep range you are shooting for.



Move

Extend your arms at the elbows to straighten your arms, lifting your body
weight up. Hold this position with your arms fully extended, and contract
your triceps as hard as possible. Resist your body weight as you return
your arms to the start position. Continue performing reps in this manner.
                             Chapter 19
                               Biceps
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the biceps muscles, including the biceps brachii and brachialis. The biceps
muscles include the long head and short head, which can be seen in the diagram.
The brachialis is located beneath the biceps. The biceps exercises are divided
into standing curl exercises; seated curl exercises; cable curl exercises; preacher
and concentration curl exercises; body-weight curl exercises; and hammer and
reverse-grip curl exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a
workout, any one of the same type can be substituted.




Standing Curl Exercises
     Barbell Curl
     Barbell Curl With Bands
     Standing Dumbbell Curl
     Standing Alternating Dumbbell Curl
     Smith Machine Drag Curl
     Smith Machine Curl Throw
     Band Curl
Seated Curl Exercises
    Seated Dumbbell Curl
    Seated Alternating Dumbbell Curl
    Incline Dumbbell Curl
    Incline Alternating Dumbbell Curl
    Prone Incline Dumbbell Curl
    Seated Barbell Curl

Cable Curl Exercises
    Standing Cable Curl
    Lying Cable Curl
    One-Arm Cable Curl
    Incline Cable Curl
    One-Arm High-Cable Curl
    Seated One-Arm Cable Concentration Curl
    Lying Cable Concentration Curl
    Behind-the-Back Cable Curl
    Standing Cable Concentration Curl
    Overhead Cable Curl

Preacher and Concentration Curl Exercises
    Barbell Preacher Curl
    One-Arm Dumbbell Preacher Curl
    Scott Curl
    Dumbbell Concentration Curl

Body-Weight Curl Exercises
    Biceps Ladder
    TRX Body-Weight Curl

Hammer and Reverse-Grip Curl Exercises
    Dumbbell Hammer Curl
    Alternating Dumbbell Hammer Curl
    Seated Dumbbell Hammer Curl
    Rope Cable Hammer Curl
    Reverse-Grip Barbell Curl
 Reverse-Grip Cable Curl



                           Barbell Curl
Start

With your knees slightly bent and your feet about shoulder-width apart,
grasp a barbell with a shoulder-width, underhand grip. Let the bar hang
to your thighs. Keep your abs pulled in and your elbows stationary.



Move

Without swaying, slowly curl the bar in an arc toward your shoulders.
Pause at the top of the movement, squeeze your biceps, and slowly lower
the bar to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar.
                  Barbell Curl With Bands
Start

Attach both ends of a band to the ends of a barbell or EZ bar. Stand on
the middle of the band and pick up the bar using an underhand grip.



Move

Perform curls as you normally would, focusing on the extra tension in the
top position that the bands provide by concentrating on the biceps
contractions. Slowly lower the bar to the start position.
                  Standing Dumbbell Curl
Start

Stand with your knees slightly bent and your feet about hip-width apart.
Grasp a pair of dumbbells with an underhand grip. Let the dumbbells
hang at the sides of your thighs.



Move

Without swaying, slowly curl the dumbbells in an arc toward your
shoulders. Pause at the top of the movement, squeeze your biceps, and
slowly lower the weights to the starting position.




         Standing Alternating Dumbbell Curl
Start

Stand with your knees slightly bent and your feet about hip-width apart.
Grasp a pair of dumbbells with a neutral grip. Let the dumbbells hang at
the sides of your thighs.



Move

Slowly curl the left arm in an arc toward your shoulder. As the dumbbell
passes your hip, start to supinate your wrist (turn it out) until your palm
is facing your shoulder at the top position. Pause at the top of the
movement, squeeze your biceps, and slowly lower the weight in the
reverse manner. Repeat the movement with the right arm. One curl with
both arms equals one rep.




                 Smith Machine Drag Curl
Start
Unlock the bar on the Smith machine and hold it in front of your thighs
with an underhand grip, as you would holding a free-weight barbell.



Move

Slowly curl the bar upward, allowing your elbows to track behind your
body as the barbell goes up. Stop at about chest height and slowly lower
the bar to the start position. This exercise helps to minimize the
involvement of the front delts, which come into play when the elbows
move forward during curls. And with the biceps moving behind the body,
this exercise further targets the long head of the biceps.




               Smith Machine Curl Throw
Start

Unlock the bar on the Smith machine and hold it in front of your thighs
with an underhand grip, as you would holding a free-weight barbell.
Move

As quickly and as explosively as possible, curl the bar upward, allowing
it to leave your hands in the top position. Catch the bar with an
underhand grip as it comes down, assisting it back into the start position.
Reset your grip if you need to and repeat.




                             Band Curl
Start

Stand on the middle of an exercise band with a wide-enough stance to
provide adequate resistance on the bands. Hold the handles with an
underhand grip.



Move

Curl the handles up toward your shoulders and contract your biceps as
hard as you can. Slowly lower the handles to the start position.
                    Seated Dumbbell Curl
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench or on a low-back bench with your feet
planted firmly on the floor. Hold a pair of dumbbells with an underhand
grip and let them hang at the sides of the bench.



Move

Curl the dumbbells up in an arc toward your shoulders. Pause at the top
of the movement, squeeze your biceps, and slowly lower the weights to
the starting position.
           Seated Alternating Dumbbell Curl
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench or on a low-back bench with your feet
planted firmly on the floor. Hold a pair of dumbbells with a neutral grip
and let them hang at the sides of the bench.



Move

Slowly curl the right arm in an arc toward your shoulder. As the
dumbbell passes your hip, start to supinate your wrist (turn it out) until
your palm is facing your shoulder at the top position. Pause at the top of
the movement, squeeze your biceps, and slowly lower the weight in the
reverse manner. Repeat the movement with the left arm. One curl with
both arms equals one rep.
                    Incline Dumbbell Curl
Start

Grasp a pair of dumbbells and lie back on an incline bench set at about
45 to 60 degrees, allowing your arms to hang straight down toward the
floor by your sides. Use an underhand grip, with your palms facing
forward.



Move

Keeping your shoulders back and upper arms in a fixed position
perpendicular to the floor, lock your elbows at your sides and curl both
dumbbells toward your shoulders. Slowly return the dumbbell to the
starting position.
          Incline Alternating Dumbbell Curl
Start

Grasp a pair of dumbbells and lie back on an incline bench set at about
45 to 60 degrees, allowing your arms to hang straight down toward the
floor by your sides. Use a neutral grip, with your palms facing in.



Move

Keeping your shoulders back and upper arms in a fixed position
perpendicular to the floor, lock your elbows at your sides and curl one
arm toward your shoulder. As you curl, supinate your wrist so that your
palm faces your shoulder at the top of the movement. Slowly return the
dumbbell to the starting position along the same path and repeat with the
other arm.
               Prone Incline Dumbbell Curl
Start
Lie facedown on an incline bench with a dumbbell in each hand. Let your
arms hang straight down perpendicular to the floor. Your chest should be
right at the top of the bench. Keep your head up and chest high to ensure
easy breathing.



Move

Curl your right arm up and toward your left shoulder. Contract your
biceps as hard as possible then slowly lower the dumbbell to the start
position. Perform with the left arm and alternate arms in this manner.
                      Seated Barbell Curl
Start
Sit on a short-back bench or an adjustable bench set to 90 degrees and
rest the bar on your thighs. Hold the bar with an underhand grip with
your hands spaced shoulder-width apart.



Move

Curl the weight toward your shoulders. Contract your biceps as hard as
possible in the top position for a second then slowly lower the weight and
repeat.
                     Standing Cable Curl
Start
Stand in front of a low-pulley cable with your knees slightly bent and
your feet about hip-width apart. With an underhand, shoulder-width grip,
grab a straight bar attached to the low pulley. Hold the bar in front of
your thighs and step back from the pulley enough to keep the weight
plates from touching the bottom plate.



Move

Curl the bar up in an arc toward your shoulders. Pause at the top of the
movement, squeeze your biceps, and slowly lower the bar to the starting
position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar attachment.
                        Lying Cable Curl
Start

Lie on the floor or on a bench in front of a low-pulley cable with the
pulley in the middle of your feet. With an underhand, shoulder-width
grip, grasp a straight bar attached to the low pulley and lean back until
your back is flat against the floor.



Move

Curl the bar in an arc toward your shoulders. Pause at the top of the
movement, squeeze your biceps, and slowly lower the bar to the starting
position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar attachment.
                     One-Arm Cable Curl
Start

With your feet shoulder-width apart, stand in front of a low-pulley cable
apparatus. Using an underhand grip with your left hand, hold a single-
handle D-grip attached to a low-pulley handle.



Move

Curl the handle up in an arc across your body toward your opposite
shoulder. Hold the contraction at the top for a second before returning to
the starting position. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat on
the right side.
                      Incline Cable Curl
Start

Place an incline bench set at 45 to 60 degrees in the middle of a cable
crossover apparatus. Grab the single-handle D-grips attached to the low
pulleys and sit on the incline bench holding your arms down and out to
your sides in line with the cables.



Move

Curl both arms toward your shoulders. Slowly return the handles to the
starting position.
                 One-Arm High-Cable Curl
Start

With an underhand grip, grasp the single-handle D-grip attached to the
upper pulley. Your working arm should be extended out to your side and
parallel with the floor or slightly higher. Hold on to the opposite side of
the cable crossover apparatus.



Move

Curl the handle in toward your shoulder while keeping your upper arm
stationary. Hold for a second in the flexed position while squeezing your
biceps hard. This will look like a bodybuilder doing a biceps pose.
Slowly return the handle to the starting position. You can also do this
exercise two arms at a time.
    Seated One-Arm Cable Concentration Curl
Start

Sit on the floor about two feet (61 centimeters) in front of a low-pulley
cable with a single-handle D-grip attached to the pulley. Using an
underhand grip, grasp the handle with your right hand and brace your
arm against the inside of your right thigh.



Move

Curl the handle up toward your shoulder while keeping your upper arm
stationary against your leg. Hold for a second in the flexed position while
squeezing your biceps hard. Slowly return the handle to the starting
position. Complete all reps with the right arm then repeat with the left
arm.
            Lying Cable Concentration Curl
Start

Lie faceup on a flat bench set lengthwise in the middle of a cable
crossover apparatus with your head closest to the pulley. With an
underhand grip, grab a straight-bar handle attached to the high pulley and
extend your arms straight over your chest.



Move

Keeping your upper arms perpendicular to your torso, curl the bar toward
your forehead. Hold the contraction for a second, then slowly return the
bar to the starting position.
                Behind-the-Back Cable Curl
Start

Attach a D-handle to a low cable and stand with your back to the pulley
in a staggered stance (left foot forward and right foot back slightly to the
left of the pulley). Hold the handle with an underhand grip in your right
hand and keep your right arm straight and extended behind your body.



Move

Keeping your upper arm stationary, curl the handle by flexing your elbow
until your hand is close to your shoulder. Contract your biceps as hard as
possible and then return the handle to the start position. Perform all reps
on the right arm and then repeat with the left arm.
          Standing Cable Concentration Curl
Start

Attach a D-handle to a cable pulley on the cable station and adjust the
cable pulley to about shoulder height. If your cable station does not
adjust, do this from the top pulley in the same manner as described in this
exercise’s Move section. Hold the handle with a hammer grip with your
arm extended out in front of you.



Move

Keeping your upper arm stationary, flex your arm at just the elbow to
bring the handle toward your chest. Contract your biceps as hard as
possible in this position and then slowly return the handle to the start
position. Complete all reps on one arm before repeating on the other arm.




                     Overhead Cable Curl
Start

Attach a straight or EZ bar attachment to the pulley of a lat pulldown
station. Reach overhead and grab the bar with an underhand, shoulder-
width grip. Your arms and shoulders should all be in a straight line
overhead. Sit down on the lat pulldown seat with your legs secured under
the support pads.



Move

Keeping your upper arms stationary, slowly curl the bar down behind
your head. Focus on curling using the biceps and reaching a controlled
contraction just behind the top of your head. You can also do this
exercise kneeling in a cable crossover station. It is the same motion
described earlier, but from a kneeling position on the floor using the high
pulley on a cable crossover station.




                    Barbell Preacher Curl
Start

Set the seat height of the preacher curl bench so that when you sit down,
the armrest is slightly below shoulder level. Place your upper arms over
the armrest and grab a barbell with an underhand grip.



Move

With the backs of your upper arms pressed firmly against the pad, curl
the bar up toward your shoulders until your elbows are just a bit beyond
90 degrees. Forcefully flex the biceps at the top of the movement, then
slowly lower the weight.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar.




          One-Arm Dumbbell Preacher Curl
Start

Set the seat height of the preacher curl bench so that when you sit down
or stand up in a standing preacher bench (as shown in photo), the armrest
is slightly below shoulder level. Grasp a dumbbell in your left hand and
place the back of your upper arm flush against the angled side of the
preacher bench pad. Brace yourself with the right arm for stability.



Move

Curl the dumbbell up toward your shoulder until your elbow is just a bit
beyond 90 degrees. Forcefully flex the biceps at the top of the movement,
then slowly lower the weight to the starting position. Complete the
desired number of reps and then repeat on the right side.




                              Scott Curl
Start

Flip the pad on a preacher bench so that your chest and abs rest on the
inclined side and your arms lie along the flat, vertical side. Lean into the
pad so that your body weight is partially supported. Take an underhand,
shoulder-width grip on a barbell or EZ bar and allow your arms to hang
straight down from your shoulders along the flat side of the armrest.



Move

Slowly curl the bar up toward your shoulders, keeping your upper arms
pressed into the pad and your upper body steady. Hold the contraction at
the top for a second and flex the biceps as hard as possible. Slowly return
the weight to the starting position.




              Dumbbell Concentration Curl
Start

Stand with a shoulder-width stance and bend forward from the hips.
Bend over and let your arm hang straight down while holding a dumbbell
with an underhand grip in your left hand.
Move
Contract your biceps to curl the dumbbell up toward your chest, then
lower it under control all the way down to the starting position. Complete
the desired number of reps and then repeat on the right side.




                          Biceps Ladder
Start

The easiest place to do this exercise is on a Smith machine, but you can
also do it in a power rack. Set the bar in the Smith machine at a height
that allows you to hang from the bar as when during an inverted row so
that your back just clears the floor with only your heels making contact
with the floor. Use an underhand and shoulder-width grip on the bar.



Move

Curl your body up toward the bar, bringing your face to the bar. Slowly
lower your body to the start position. Do as many reps as you can until
you reach muscle failure, then immediately raise the bar up one notch
and continue doing body-weight curls. Each time you reach muscle
failure, raise the bar up one notch until you have reached the very top
notch. Each time you raise the bar up, it reduces the resistance that your
body provides, making it easier to continue the set. In essence, this is one
long, extended set. The novel movement of this exercise will stimulate
muscle fibers that you likely have been ignoring. This exercise also
places a high load on the negative part of the rep (especially on the lower
rungs) on the biceps, which induces a lot of muscle damage for
stimulating new muscle growth.




                   TRX Body-Weight Curl
Start

Set the handles of the TRX at a height that decreases your body weight
enough to allow for this tough exercise. Hold the handles with an
underhand grip and start with just your heels touching the floor while
your extended arms support your body weight.



Move

Trying to keep your arms as stationary as possible, curl your forearms
toward your head to lift your body up to the handles. Slowly lower your
body until your arms are fully extended again in the start position.




                  Dumbbell Hammer Curl
Start

With your knees slightly bent and your feet about hip-width apart, grasp
a pair of dumbbells with a neutral grip. Let the dumbbells hang at the
sides of your thighs.
Move

Slowly curl the dumbbells up in an arc toward your shoulders while
maintaining the neutral grip. Pause at the top of the movement, and
slowly lower the weights back to the starting position.




         Alternating Dumbbell Hammer Curl
Start

With your knees slightly bent and your feet about hip-width apart, grasp
a pair of dumbbells with a neutral grip. Let the dumbbells hang at the
sides of your thighs.



Move

Slowly curl the left arm in an arc toward your shoulder while maintaining
the neutral grip. Pause at the top of the movement and then slowly lower
the weight in the reverse manner. Repeat the movement with the right
arm. One curl with both arms equals one rep.




             Seated Dumbbell Hammer Curl
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench or on a low-back bench with your feet
planted firmly on the floor. Hold a pair of dumbbells with a neutral grip
and let them hang at the sides of the bench.



Move

Slowly curl the dumbbells in an arc toward your shoulders while
maintaining the neutral grip. Pause at the top of the movement and
slowly lower the weight in the reverse manner.
Note: You can do this exercise as a seated alternating dumbbell curl.




                 Rope Cable Hammer Curl
Start

With a neutral grip, grasp a rope handle attached to the low pulley of a
cable apparatus. Knees are slightly bent and feet are shoulder-width
apart.



Move

Curl your arms up, keeping them stationary at your sides as you do so.
Bring your hands all the way up to your shoulders (as close as you can
without shifting your elbows too far forward) and pause for a second at
the top. Lower the rope to the starting position.
                Reverse-Grip Barbell Curl
Start

With your knees slightly bent and your feet about shoulder-width apart,
grasp a barbell with a shoulder-width, overhand grip. Let the bar hang to
your thighs. Keep your abs pulled in and your elbows stationary.



Move

Without swaying, slowly curl the bar in an arc toward your shoulders.
Pause at the top of the movement and slowly lower the bar to the starting
position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar.
                  Reverse-Grip Cable Curl
Start

Stand in front of a low-pulley cable with your knees slightly bent and
your feet about shoulder-width apart. With an overhand shoulder-width
grip, grab a straight bar attached to the low pulley. Hold the bar in front
of your thighs and step back from the pulley to keep the weight plates
from touching the bottom plate.



Move

Curl the bar up in an arc toward your shoulders. Pause at the top of the
movement and slowly lower the bar to the starting position.

Note: You can do this exercise with an EZ bar attachment.
                             Chapter 20
                             Forearms
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the forearm muscles, including the wrist flexors and wrist extensors. The wrist
flexors are located on the front of the forearms, while the wrist extensors are
located on the back of the forearm. See the diagram for the location of each
group. The forearm exercises are divided into wrist curl exercises, reverse wrist
curl exercises, and grip exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in
a workout, any one of the same type can be substituted.




Wrist Curl Exercises
     Barbell Wrist Curl
     Dumbbell Wrist Curl
     Standing Behind-the-Back Wrist Curl

Reverse Wrist Curl Exercises
     Barbell Reverse Wrist Curl
     Dumbbell Reverse Wrist Curl
    Standing Reverse Wrist Curl
    Wrist Roller

Grip Exercises
    Weight Plate Pinch
    Gorilla Hang
    Farmer’s Walk
    Hand Gripper



                          Barbell Wrist Curl
   Start

   Sit at the end of a flat bench with your legs in front of you and feet flat
   on the floor, hip-width apart. While holding a barbell with a shoulder-
   width, underhand grip, rest your forearms on the tops of your thighs so
   that your wrists and hands hang off your knees. Extend your wrists so
   that your hands hang down from your wrists at about a 90-degree angle.
   The bar should be supported with just your fingers.



   Move

   Curl the weight up, starting with your fingers and then your wrists, until
   your wrists are flexed and your hands are as much past parallel with the
   floor as possible. Hold this position for a second while forcefully
   contracting your forearm muscles, then slowly return the bar back to the
   start in the reverse manner.
                     Dumbbell Wrist Curl
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench with your legs in front of you and feet flat
on the floor or bench base, or up on the bench frame depending on the
height of the bench. While holding a dumbbell with an underhand grip in
your right hand, rest your right forearm on top of your right thigh so that
your wrist and hand hang off your knee. Extend your wrist so that your
hand hangs down from your wrist at about a 90-degree angle. The
dumbbell should be supported with just your fingers.



Move

Curl the weight up, starting with your fingers and then your wrist, until
your wrist is flexed and your hand is as much past parallel with the floor
as possible. Hold this position for a second while forcefully contracting
your forearm muscles, then slowly return the dumbbell back to the start
in the reverse manner. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat
with the left arm.
        Standing Behind-the-Back Wrist Curl
Start

Stand while holding a barbell with an overhand grip behind your thighs.
Both your hands and feet should be shoulder-width apart. The barbell
should be supported with just your fingers.



Move

Curl the weight up, starting with your fingers and then your wrists, until
your wrists are flexed and your hands are as close to parallel with the
floor as possible. Hold this position for a second while forcefully
contracting your forearm muscles, then slowly return the barbell back to
the starting position.
                Barbell Reverse Wrist Curl
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench with your legs in front of you and feet flat
on the floor, or on the bench frame depending on the height of the bench.
While holding a barbell with a shoulder-width, overhand grip, rest your
forearms on the tops of your thighs so that your wrists and hands hang
off your knees. Flex your wrists so that your hands hang down from your
wrists at about a 90-degree angle.



Move

Extend your wrists to lift the weight up as high as you can. Hold this
position for a second while forcefully contracting your forearm muscles,
then slowly return the bar back to the starting position.
              Dumbbell Reverse Wrist Curl
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench with your legs in front of you and feet flat
on the floor, or on the bench frame depending on the height of the bench.
Using an overhand grip to hold a dumbbell with your right hand, rest
your forearm on the top of your right thigh so that your wrist and hand
hang off your knee. Flex your wrist so that your hand hangs down from
your wrist at about a 90-degree angle.



Move

Extend your wrist to lift the weight up as high as you can. Hold this
position for a second while forcefully contracting your forearm muscles,
then slowly return the dumbbell back to the starting position. Complete
the desired number of reps and repeat with the left arm.
               Standing Reverse Wrist Curl
Start

While standing and using an overhand grip, hold a barbell about four to
six inches (10 to 15 centimeters) in front of your thighs. Both your hands
and feet should be shoulder-width apart.



Move

Extend your wrist to lift the weight up as high as you can. Hold this
position for a second while forcefully contracting your forearm muscles,
then slowly return the bar back to the starting position.
                            Wrist Roller
Start

Hold the wrist roller out in front of you at arm’s length and about
shoulder height with the attached weight on the floor.



Move

To work the wrist extensors on the back of the forearm turn each wrist up
in succession from left to right until the weight has reached the wrist
roller bar. Then slowly lower the weight by resisting the flexion of the
wrists in the same succession as used to lift the weight. Once the weight
has reached the floor reverse the movement and keep going in this
manner until reaching muscle failure. Once you can roll the weight up
and back down 6-8 times, consider adding more weight. This unique
exercise utilizes all concentric contractions to lift the weight and then all
eccentric contractions to lower the weight. You can also work your wrist
flexors on the front of the forearm by flexing your wrists to lift the
weight up instead of extending them. Some wrist rollers are designed to
go over the safety bars in a power rack. This way you do not need to
support the weight with your shoulders and can better focus on the
forearms.




                       Weight Plate Pinch
Start

Take two equal-sized weight plates and place them together on their sides
with the smooth sides out by your left foot. Hold them together with your
left hand fingertips, placing your thumb on one side and your fingers on
the other.



Move

Pick up the plates and hold them at the side of your left thigh, similar to a
unilateral deadlift. Hold the plates in this position for several seconds and
then return the plates to the floor without letting go until you have
performed as many reps as desired. Repeat with the right hand.




                            Gorilla Hang
Start

Grab on to a pull-up bar with just your left hand.
Move

Lift your feet off the floor and hang for as long as possible with your left
hand. Repeat with your right hand.




                          Farmer’s Walk
Start

Using a neutral grip, hold on to two heavy dumbbells.
Move

Walk back and forth across the room as many times as you can while
holding the dumbbells.




                         Hand Gripper
Start

Hold a hand gripper in your hand with your upper arm straight by your
side and your elbow bent about 90 degrees so that your forearm is
parallel with the floor and out in front of you.



Move
Start with the gripper fully open and squeeze it closed as explosively as
possible. Try to get the bottom of the handles to touch in the closed
position. Hold this closed position for 1-2 seconds and then slowly open.
Once you have completed all reps with one hand repeat with the other
hand.
                            Chapter 21
                            Quadriceps
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the quadriceps muscles, including the vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, vastus
intermedius, and rectus femoris. See the diagram for the location of each
quadriceps muscle. The quadriceps exercises are divided into squat exercises, leg
press and machine squat exercises, lunge and step exercises, and leg extension
exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a workout, any one of
the same type can be substituted. Although the squat, lunge, and step-up
exercises involve the quadriceps, hamstrings, and glutes (as well as the adductor
muscles in the inner thigh), I have categorized them as quadriceps exercises for
the sake of simplicity.




Squat Exercises
    Barbell Squat
    Barbell Front Squat
    Box Squat
    Sissy Squat
    Smith Machine Squat
    Dumbbell Squat
    Dumbbell Front Squat
    One-Leg Squat
    Jump Squat
    Barbell Hack Squat
    Jefferson Squat
    Zercher Squat
    Barbell Squat With Bands
    Band Squat

Leg Press and Machine Squat Exercises
    Leg Press
    One-Leg Leg Press
    Horizontal Leg Press
    Hack Squat

Lunge and Step Exercises
    Lunge
    Walking Lunge
    Back Lunge
    Side Lunge
    Split Squat
    Step-Up
    Diagonal Step-Up

Leg Extension Exercises
    Leg Extension
    Cable Leg Extension



                             Barbell Squat
   Start

   Stand with a barbell rested on your shoulders and traps. Both your hands
and your feet should be about shoulder-width apart. Maintain the natural
arch in your lower back and keep your head directed forward.



Move

Bend at the knees and hips, letting your glutes track backward to lower
yourself. At the point where your thighs are parallel to the floor or lower,
reverse direction, driving up forcefully through your heels to a standing
position.

Note: For a detailed description of using the squat for maximal strength,
see chapter 8.




                      Barbell Front Squat
Start

Stand with a barbell rested on your shoulders and upper chest, holding
with either an Olympic-style grip or cross-grip (as pictured). Maintain
the natural arch in your lower back and keep your head directed forward.
Move
Perform a basic squat, bending your knees and driving your hips back to
lower yourself until your thighs are parallel to the floor. Then forcefully
extend your legs to stand back up to the starting position.




                              Box Squat
Start

Place a box or bench that is about knee height behind you in the power
rack or squat rack. Unrack the bar and move back so that you’re several
inches in front of the box or bench.



Move

Squat back and down until your glutes make contact with the box, and
immediately explode back up by pressing through your heels until you’re
back in the standing position. Do not "plop" or fully sit down on the box.
The goal is to squat down slowly and softly on the box and then
immediately explode up. This is a great exercise for learning how to
squat because it reinforces the sitting-back portion of the squat. It is also
a great exercise for increasing power in the squat, which can translate
into stronger squats.




                              Sissy Squat
Start

Stand with your feet hip-width to shoulder-width apart and hold on to
something sturdy that can support you.



Move

Rise on your toes and lean back. Slowly descend, allowing your knees to
go ahead of your toes. Go as low as you can and return to upright. The
best way to make sure this exercise is executed correctly is to try to keep
your hips and back straight. Act as if you were kneeling to the ground
without moving your upper body. The only moving part of your body is
the lower portion of the leg. To add resistance, hold a weight plate on
your chest with the arm that is not stabilizing your body.




                     Smith Machine Squat
Start
Stand in a Smith machine with the bar across your shoulders and traps,
grasping it just outside your shoulders. Twist the bar to unrack it.



Move

With your chest high, head forward, and back slightly arched, bend your
knees and hips as if you’re sitting back in a chair until your thighs are
parallel to the floor. Reverse the motion by driving through your heels
and pressing your hips forward to return to the starting position.

Note: You can also do this exercise as a front squat.




                         Dumbbell Squat
Start

Stand while holding two dumbbells in a shoulder-width, neutral grip by
your sides. Maintain the natural arch in your lower back and keep your
head directed forward.
Move

Bend at the knees and hips, letting your glutes track backward to lower
yourself. At the point where your thighs are parallel to the floor, reverse
direction, driving up forcefully through your heels to a standing position.




                    Dumbbell Front Squat
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart. Bring the dumbbells up and
rest the ends on your shoulders, the same as in the catch with dumbbell
cleans.



Move

Keeping your torso as upright as possible, squat until your thighs are
parallel with the floor or lower and then explode back up by pressing
through your heels.




                          One-Leg Squat
Start

Stand with a barbell rested on your shoulders and traps, holding it with a
shoulder-width grip. Rest the top of your right foot on a flat bench placed
two to three feet (half a meter to one meter) behind you. Maintain the
natural arch in your lower back and keep your head directed forward.



Move

Bend your left knee and hip to lower your body until your left thigh is
parallel to the floor. Reverse the direction, driving up forcefully through
the left heel to the starting position. Perform the desired number of reps
and then repeat with the right leg.

Note: You can do this exercise with dumbbells.
                             Jump Squat
Start
Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart and your knees slightly
bent.



Move

Quickly drop down by bending at the knees and hips, letting your glutes
track backward to lower yourself into a squat. At the point where your
thighs are parallel to the floor, quickly and explosively reverse direction,
driving up through your heels and the balls of your feet to lift your body
off the floor as high as possible. Land with soft knees and immediately
lower into the next rep.

Note: Research shows that doing this exercise with just body weight and
no added resistance produces the greatest amount of power.
                      Barbell Hack Squat
Start

Stand with feet shoulder-width apart. Using a shoulder-width grip, hold a
barbell behind your thighs. Maintain the natural arch in your lower back
and keep your head directed forward.



Move

Bend at the knees and hips, letting your glutes track backward to lower
yourself. At the point where your thighs are parallel to the floor or the
bar touches the floor, reverse direction, driving up forcefully through
your heels to a standing position.




                         Jefferson Squat
Start

Straddle a loaded barbell placed on the floor and running sideways
between your feet. Squat down to pick up the bar, grabbing it with one
hand facing palm backward and one hand facing palm forward. Hold the
bar as you stand with a grip that’s wider than shoulder width.
Move

Bend at the knees and hips, letting your glutes track backward to lower
yourself. At the point where your thighs are parallel to the floor or the
bar touches the floor, reverse direction, driving up forcefully through
your heels to a standing position.




                           Zercher Squat
Start

Stand with a shoulder-width grip while holding a barbell at waist height
in the crook of your crossed arms.



Move

Bend at the knees and hips, letting your glutes track backward to lower
yourself. At the point where your thighs are parallel to the floor, reverse
direction, driving up forcefully through your heels to the standing
position.




                 Barbell Squat With Bands
Start

Attach a band to each side of the barbell. Attach the other end of each
band to the bottom of the power rack or squat rack or to a heavy
dumbbell. Stand with the barbell resting on your shoulders and traps.
Both your hands and your feet should be about shoulder-width apart.
Maintain the natural arch in your lower back and keep your head directed
forward.



Move

Bend at the knees and hips, letting your glutes track backward to lower
yourself. At the point where your thighs are parallel to the floor, reverse
direction, driving up forcefully through your heels to a standing position.
                             Band Squat
Start

Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart on top of an exercise
band. Be sure to keep your feet planted and straight throughout the
exercise so that the band does not slip out. For light resistance, keep your
arms at your sides. For maximal resistance, lift your arms so that the
handles are near your shoulders with the bands running down behind
your shoulders as if you were doing band shoulder presses.



Move

Squat by sitting back to bend at the hips and knees until your thighs are
about parallel with the floor. Drive through your heels to stand back up
into a fully upright position. Repeat for reps.
                              Leg Press
Start

Sit in an angled leg press machine and place your feet shoulder-width
apart in the center of the foot plate. Unhook the safety stoppers and
support the weight with your legs.



Move

Slowly lower the weight, bringing your knees toward your chest but
stopping when your knees are at a 90-degree angle. Pause a moment
before pressing through your heels to return the weight to the starting
position at full leg extension but without locking out at the knees.
                       One-Leg Leg Press
Start

Sit in a leg press machine and place your left foot in the middle of the
platform, keeping the right foot flat on the floor for stability. Unhook the
safety stoppers and support the weight with your left leg.



Move

Slowly lower the weight, bringing your left knee toward your chest but
stopping when your knee is at a 90-degree angle. Pause a moment before
pressing through your heel to return the weight to the starting position at
full leg extension but without locking out at the knee. Perform the
desired number of reps and then repeat with the right leg.
                     Horizontal Leg Press
Start

Lie in a horizontal leg press machine with your back flat against the pad.
Place your feet shoulder-width apart in the center of the foot plate.
Unhook the safety stopper and support the weight with your legs.



Move

Slowly lower yourself toward the foot plate, bringing your knees toward
your chest but stopping when your knees are at a 90-degree angle. Pause
a moment before pressing through your heels to return the weight to the
starting position at full leg extension but without locking out the knees.
                            Hack Squat
Start

Stand in a hack squat machine with your feet hip-width apart in the
middle of the foot plate. Unhook the safety stopper and support the
weight with your legs.



Move

Slowly squat down until your hips and knees are at or just below a 90-
degree angle. From there, stand back up by pressing through your heels
to lift the weight to an upright position. Come almost to a full extension
at the top without locking out your knees.
                                 Lunge
Start

Support a barbell across your shoulders and traps and hold it with a
shoulder-width grip while standing with your feet together. Keep your
head directed forward and maintain the arch in your low back.



Move

Step forward with your right foot, leading with your heel, and lunge
down toward the floor, maintaining control over the speed of your
descent. Lower yourself until your left knee almost touches the floor.
Push back off your right foot, returning to the starting position. Repeat
with the left leg and alternate reps.

Note: You can do this exercise with dumbbells.
                         Walking Lunge
Start

Support a barbell across your shoulders and traps and hold it with a
shoulder-width grip while standing with your feet together. Keep your
head directed forward and maintain the arch in your low back.



Move

Step forward with your right foot, leading with your heel, and lunge
down toward the floor, maintaining control over the speed of your
descent. Lower yourself until your left knee almost touches the floor. Lift
yourself up and toward your right foot by pulling with your right leg.
Come to a standing position with both feet together and repeat the motion
with your left leg. Alternate legs with each rep.

Note: You can do this exercise with dumbbells.
                            Back Lunge
Start

Stand with your feet about hip-width apart while supporting a barbell on
your shoulders, holding dumbbells in your hands, or using just your body
weight.



Move

Step backward with your left leg and lower your body until your front leg
is bent at the knee about 90 degrees. Push from the back leg to initiate the
movement and continue lifting your body with the front leg until your
back leg is back next to your front leg. Repeat by stepping back with the
right leg and continue alternating legs until all reps are completed.
                             Side Lunge
Start

You can do this exercise by holding dumbbells or a barbell or by just
using your body weight. In any case, stand with your feet about shoulder-
width apart.



Move

Step out to your right as far as you can with your right foot. The forefoot
should be turned out slightly as you plant it on the floor. Squat, shifting
your weight to the right until your right leg is about parallel with the
floor. Extend your right leg back up to lift your body up, and land with
your right foot in a shoulder-width stance again. Repeat in the same
manner with your left leg and continue alternating legs each rep until all
reps are completed.
                              Split Squat
Start

Support a barbell across your shoulders and traps and hold it with a
shoulder-width grip while standing with your feet together. Keep your
head directed forward and maintain the arch in your low back. Take a
large step forward with your right leg. Your left heel will lift off the floor.



Move

Drop your body downward by bending your right knee and lowering
your left knee toward the floor. Reverse the motion and press back up
into a standing split squat. Complete all reps for the right side, then
switch to the left side.

Note: You can do this exercise with dumbbells.
                              Step-Up
Start

Place a knee-high box or bench in front of you and grasp a dumbbell in
each hand or use just your body weight. Stand with your feet in a
comfortable hip-width stance.



Move

Step forward with one leg onto the step and drive through that thigh to
bring your body upward. Bring the trailing leg to the top of the step and
stand on the box, then step back with the opposite leg to the floor and
lower yourself. Be sure to keep your low back in its natural arch and your
upper body upright throughout the whole movement. Alternate legs with
each rep.
                        Diagonal Step-Up
Start

Place a box or a bench that’s about knee-height in front of you.



Move

Step up on to the box or bench with the working leg at about a 45-degree
angle to the back leg. Extend at the knees, hips, and ankles to lift your
body so that both feet are on the box. Lower yourself to the floor using
the same leg you stepped up with and switch legs once you have finished
the descent. To add resistance, grasp dumbbells in each hand, or place a
barbell on your back, or wear a weighted vest. Research shows that
diagonal step-ups target the quadriceps better than standard step-ups,
which better target the hamstrings and glutes.
        Leg Extension
Start
Adjust the seat back and footpad of a leg extension machine so that when
you sit in it your knees are at the edge of the bench and your ankles are
just below the footpad or rollers. Sit back with your back pressed firmly
against the back pad.



Move

Grasp the handles or the seat edges behind your hips and keep your upper
body stable as you extend your legs in a smooth movement until fully
extended. Contract your quads at the top and slowly lower the weight
under control to the starting position.




                     Cable Leg Extension
Start

Attach an ankle cuff to your right ankle and connect it to a low-pulley
cable. Your lower leg should form a 90-degree angle at the knee.



Move
Kick your lower leg forward and up until your leg is fully extended.
Contract the quad muscles for a second and then return your foot to the
starting position. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat with
the left leg.
                    Chapter 22
                Hamstrings and Glutes
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the hamstrings and gluteal (glute) muscles, including the biceps femoris,
semitendinosus, semimembranosus, gluteus maximus, and gluteus medius. See
the diagram for the location of each of these muscles. The hamstring and glute
exercises are divided into hip extension exercises and leg curl exercises.
Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a workout, any one of the same
type can be substituted.




Hip Extension Exercises
     Romanian Deadlift
     Dumbbell Romanian Deadlift
     Glute and Ham Raise
     Reverse Hamstring Extension
     Bench Bridge
     Cable Hamstring Raise

Leg Curl Exercises
 Lying Leg Curl
 Lying Dumbbell Leg Curl
 Seated Leg Curl
 Cable Leg Curl



                      Romanian Deadlift
Start
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent. Using
an overhand, shoulder-width grip or a staggered grip, hold a barbell in
both hands in front of your thighs.



Move

Lean forward from your hips, pushing your hips back as you guide the
bar down your legs until the bar is at mid-shin height. Slowly extend at
the hips to raise the bar back to the starting position.
              Dumbbell Romanian Deadlift
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and your knees slightly bent.
Using an overhand grip, hold a pair of dumbbells in both hands in front
of your thighs.



Move

Lean forward from your hips, pushing your hips back as you guide the
dumbbells down your legs until they are mid-shin height. Slowly extend
at the hips to raise the weights back to the starting position.
                     Glute and Ham Raise
Start
Position yourself in a glute-ham raise bench with your thighs resting on
the rounded pad and your ankles in the ankle pads and feet pressed firmly
on the foot plate. Bend forward from the hips so that your torso hangs
down toward the floor.



Move

Start the move by extending at the hips. Once your torso is in line with
your thighs, immediately flex your hamstrings to curl your body up from
the knees until your thighs and torso are upright.

Note: There is an apparatus known as a glute and ham raise that is
designed specifically for this exercise as seen in the photos. However,
very few gyms have this apparatus.
              Reverse Hamstring Extension
Start

Lie facedown on a horizontal back extension bench. Hold the footpads
with your arms to support your torso on the pad. Your hips and legs
should hang off the end of the pad at a 90-degree angle.



Move

Extend at the hips to raise your legs up to parallel with the floor. Hold
this position for a second, then reverse the motion to lower your legs
back to the starting position.




                           Bench Bridge
Start

Lie on the floor next to a bench with your back flat on the floor and your
heels up on the bench. You can keep your arms at your sides on the floor
or place them across your chest.



Move

Press through your heels to extend at the hips to lift your glutes up until
your torso and upper legs are in a straight line with just your upper back
touching the floor. Contract your hamstrings and glutes as hard as you
can for a second before returning to the start position and repeating for
reps. You can increase the resistance by holding a weight plate on your
abs. To reduce the resistance, do this exercise with your feet on the floor
instead of on the bench.




                    Cable Hamstring Raise
Start

Stand facing a low-pulley cable with an ankle collar attached to your left
ankle and connected to the low pulley. Hold the cable apparatus for
support.



Move

Keeping your back straight, kick your left leg back behind you and as
high up as possible. Hold it in the top position for a second before
lowering the leg to the starting position. Complete the desired number of
reps and repeat with the right leg.
                         Lying Leg Curl
Start

Lie facedown on a leg curl machine. Position your Achilles tendons
below the padded lever and place your knees just off the edge of the
bench. Grasp the bench or the handles for stability. Make sure your knees
are slightly bent to protect them from overextension.



Move

Keeping your hips down on the bench, use your hamstrings to flex your
knees and raise your feet toward your glutes. Squeeze the hamstrings at
the top, then lower the lever arm to the starting position.
                  Lying Dumbbell Leg Curl
Start

Place a dumbbell between your feet and lie down on a flat bench with
your legs extended. Hold on to the edge of the pad or the legs of the
bench for stability.



Move

Slowly bring the weight up by flexing your knees until your lower legs
are just short of vertical. Slowly lower the dumbbell back to the starting
position.
                         Seated Leg Curl
Start

Sit in a seated leg curl machine with your knees just past the bench and
your ankles placed on the ankle pad. Hold the handles to support your
body.



Move

Curl your lower legs under you by flexing at the knees to bring your feet
as close to the bottom of the bench as possible. Hold this position for a
second and squeeze your hamstrings hard. Return your feet to the starting
position.
                         Cable Leg Curl
Start

Stand facing a low-pulley cable with an ankle collar attached to your left
ankle and connected to the low pulley. Step back two to three feet (half a
meter to one meter) from the pulley and lift your left leg out to form a
45-degree angle to your body.



Move

Slowly flex your knee to curl your lower leg down to form a 90-degree
angle at your knee. Hold this position for a second and then return your
foot to the start. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat with the
right leg.
                            Chapter 23
                             Calves
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the calf muscles, including the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles. It also
includes exercises for the major muscle on the front of the shin, the tibialis
anterior. Keeping this muscle strengthened and in balance with the
gastrocnemius and soleus can help to prevent lower-leg injuries, such as
shinsplints. The gastrocnemius has a medial head and a lateral head. The soleus
lies beneath the gastrocnemius. See the diagram for the location of these
muscles. The calf exercises are divided into exercises that focus on the
gastrocnemius and exercises that target the soleus, as well as exercises for the
tibialis anterior. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a workout, any
one of the same type can be substituted.




Gastrocnemius Exercises
     Standing Calf Raise
     Power Rack Standing Calf Raise
     Smith Machine Standing Calf Raise
     Leg Press Calf Raise
     One-Leg Press Calf Raise
    Hack Squat Calf Raise
    Donkey Calf Raise
    Calf Jump

Soleus Exercises
    Seated Calf Raise
    One-Leg Seated Calf Raise
    Dumbbell Seated Calf Raise
    Power Rack Seated Calf Raise
    Smith Machine Seated Calf Raise

Tibialis Anterior Exercises
    Seated Dumbbell Toe Raise
    Seated Cable Toe Raise
    Standing Kettlebell Toe Raise



                         Standing Calf Raise
   Start

   Stand beneath the shoulder pads of a standing calf raise machine with the
   balls of your feet at the edge of the foot rest. Keep your legs straight and
   your heels down to stretch the calves.



   Move

   Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to rise as high as you can
   on the balls of your feet. Hold this position for a second, flexing your calf
   muscles, then lower your heels back to the starting position.
            Power Rack Standing Calf Raise
Start

Stand underneath a barbell set in a power rack. You can stand on a block
or weight plate, or simply just the floor (as pictured). The barbell should
be set at a height lower than your shoulders. Rest the bar on your
shoulders and traps and hold it with a shoulder-width, overhand grip.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to rise as high as you can
on the balls of your feet, raising the bar up along the sides of the power
rack. Hold this position for a second, flexing your calf muscles, then
lower your heels back to the starting position.
          Smith Machine Standing Calf Raise
Start

Stand on a block or weight plate set underneath the bar of a Smith
machine. You can also just use the floor. Rest the bar on your shoulders
and traps. Hold it with a shoulder-width, overhand grip and unlatch the
safety hooks.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to rise as high as you can
on the balls of your feet, raising the bar up along the guides of the Smith
machine. Hold this position for a second, flexing your calf muscles, then
lower your heels back to the starting position.
                      Leg Press Calf Raise
Start

Sit in a leg press machine and place your feet on the bottom of the foot
plate so that your heels hang off the foot plate. Press the foot plate up
from the safety hooks (but do not unlatch them) by straightening your
legs. Drop your toes down toward your shins to stretch your calves.



Move

Press the weight up with your toes by contracting your calf muscles.
Hold this position for a second, flexing your calf muscles, then lower
your heels back to the starting position.
                  One-Leg Press Calf Raise
Start

Sit in a leg press machine and place your left foot on the bottom of the
foot plate so that your heel hangs off the foot plate. Press the foot plate
up from the safety hooks (but do not unlatch them) by straightening your
leg. Drop your toes down toward your shin to stretch your calf.



Move

Press the weight up with your toes by contracting your calf muscles.
Hold this position for a second, flexing your calf muscles, then lower
your heel back to the start position. Perform all reps with the left leg and
then repeat with the right leg.
                    Hack Squat Calf Raise
Start

Stand in a hack squat machine with your back flat against the back pad.
Place the balls of your feet on the end of the foot plate so that your heels
hang off. Release the safety latches to support the weight with your body
and lower your heels to get a good stretch on the calves.



Move

Extend at your ankles to lift your heels as high as possible and hold this
position for a second as you contract your calves as hard as possible.
Lower your heels back to the start and repeat for reps.
                       Donkey Calf Raise
Start

Position yourself in a donkey calf raise machine so that your feet are on
the foot plate. Your torso is bent at the hips and parallel to the ground.
Your forearms rest on the forearm pad and your low back supports the
back pad. Drop your heels as low as you can to get a good stretch in your
calves.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to rise as high as you can
on the balls of your feet, raising the weight up by the pad placed on the
low back. Hold this position for a second, flexing your calf muscles, then
lower your heels back to the starting position.
                             Calf Jump
Start

This exercise is much like a squat jump, but without squatting before the
jump. To do this exercise, stand with your feet about hip-width apart.



Move

Bend only very slightly at the knees and then jump up as high as possible
by extending your feet at the ankles. Be sure to land on the balls of your
feet to take advantage of the negative force for inducing muscle damage.
Repeat for reps.
                        Seated Calf Raise
Start

Sit in the seated calf machine and place the balls of your feet on the foot
plate so that your heels hang off the edge. Place the knee pad on your
knees and unrack the weight. Drop your heels as low as you can to get a
good stretch in your calves.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to raise the weight as high
as you can on the balls of your feet. Hold this position for a second,
flexing your calf muscles, then lower your heels back to the starting
position.
                 One-Leg Seated Calf Raise
Start

Sit in the seated calf raise machine and place your right leg on the foot
plate with your right knee under the knee pad. Keep your left leg on the
floor. Unrack the weight supporting it with just your right leg.



Move

Lower your heel as low as possible to get a good stretch, then press the
weight up on the ball of your foot to raise your heel as high as possible.
Hold this position for a second as you flex your calf as hard as possible.
Then lower your heel to repeat for reps. Once you have completed all
reps with your right leg, perform in the same manner with the left leg.




                Dumbbell Seated Calf Raise
Start

Sit on the end of a flat bench with your legs hip-width apart and your feet
on a block or foot plate set on the floor. Place a dumbbell on the top of
each knee and secure them there with your hands. Drop your heels as low
as you can to get a good stretch in your calves.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to raise the weight as high
as you can on the balls of your feet. Hold this position for a second,
flexing your calf muscles, then lower your heels back to the starting
position.




              Power Rack Seated Calf Raise
Start

Place a flat bench or box in a power rack and set a block or foot plate (or
if you have neither, try 25-pound plates) about one foot in front of the
bench. You can also simply use the floor, as pictured. Set the safety pins
so that when the bar rests on them, it is at the same height as your knees
or slightly lower when you sit on the bench. Sit on the bench with the bar
resting on your thighs (a few inches up from your knee caps). The balls
of your feet are on the plates and your heels are on the floor.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to raise the weight as high
as you can on the balls of your feet. Hold this position for a second,
flexing your calf muscles, then lower your heels back to the starting
position.




            Smith Machine Seated Calf Raise
Start

Place a flat bench in a Smith machine and set a block or foot plate (or if
you have neither, try 25-pound plates) about one foot in front of the
bench. You can also use the floor or the frame of the bench, as pictured.
Sit on the bench with the unlatched bar resting on your thighs (a few
inches up from your knee caps). The balls of your feet are on the plates
and your heels are on the floor.



Move

Lift your heels by contracting the calf muscles to raise the weight as high
as you can on the balls of your feet. Hold this position for a second,
flexing your calf muscles, then lower your heels back to the starting
position.




                Seated Dumbbell Toe Raise
Start

Sit on the end of a bench with a light dumbbell placed on its end on the
floor in front of you. Place your feet under the weight plates of the top
end of the dumbbell and extend your legs out enough so that the
dumbbell hangs freely. If you need to, use an adjustable bench with the
bench raised up enough to allow clearance for the dumbbell to hang, as
pictured.



Move

Raise your toes up toward your knees as high as possible and then
reverse the motion to extend your toes as far as you can without dropping
the dumbbell and repeat for reps.
                    Seated Cable Toe Raise
Start

Place a flat bench next to a low-cable pulley with a D-handle or stirrup-
handle attachment connected to it. Place your left foot through the
attachment so that the handle is on the top of your foot. Sit on the bench
and slide back so that your left leg is supported on the bench with your
foot freely hanging off the end.



Move

Extend your ankle to point your toes forward as far as possible without
the handle attachment slipping off of your foot, then reverse the motion
to flex your ankle and lift your foot toward your shin as far back as you
can. Extend your ankle again and repeat for reps. After you perform all
reps on the left foot, repeat on the right.




               Standing Kettlebell Toe Raise
Start
Stand on a block or box or a pile of 45-pound plates that are almost as
high as the handle of the kettlebell you are using. Place one foot under
the handle so that the handle is resting on the top of your foot.



Move

Pull your foot up as high as you can. Hold this position for a second and
slowly lower the kettlebell back to the floor. Complete all reps for one
leg and then repeat on the other leg.
                     Chapter 24
                 Abdominals and Core
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of all major exercises that focus on
the abdominal muscles, including the rectus abdominis, external obliques,
internal obliques, and transverse abdominis. See the diagram below for the
location of each. The abdominal exercises are divided into upper-abdominal
exercises, lower-abdominal exercises, oblique exercises, and core exercise.
Wherever a certain type of exercise is used in a workout, any one of the same
type can be substituted.




Upper-Abdominal Exercises
     Crunch
     Straight-Leg Crunch
     Decline Crunch
     Roman Chair Crunch
     Machine Crunch
     Exercise Ball Crunch
     Crunch With Medicine Ball Throw
    Exercise Ball Crunch With Medicine Ball Throw
    Bicycle Crunch
    Cable Crunch
    Standing Cable Crunch
    Smith Machine Crunch
    Bell Tower Crunch
    V-Up
    Dumbbell V-Sit

Lower-Abdominal Exercises
    Reverse Crunch
    Incline Reverse Crunch
    Exercise Ball Reverse Crunch
    Hip Thrust
    Smith Machine Hip Thrust
    Hanging Knee Raise
    Hanging Leg Raise
    Exercise Ball Tuck
    TRX Knee Tuck
    Band Rising Knee

Oblique Exercises
    Crossover Crunch
    Reaching Crossover Crunch
    Oblique Crunch
    Dumbbell Side Bend
    Standing Cable Oblique Crunch
    Standing Cable Oblique Pushdown
    Kneeling Oblique Cable Crunch
    Side Jackknife
    Russian Twist
    Standing Medicine Ball Rotation
    Band Roundhouse Elbow

Core Exercises
    Lying Leg Raise
    Scissor Kick
 Exercise Ball Pass
 Barbell Roll-Out
 Dumbbell Woodchopper
 Cable Woodchopper
 Band Woodchopper
 Plank
 Side Plank
 Side Plank With Reach-Through



                               Crunch
Start

Lie on the floor with your knees bent. Feet and low back are flat on the
floor.



Move

With your hands cupped loosely behind your head, contract through your
abs to lift your shoulders and upper back off the floor. Hold this position
for a second before slowly lowering back to the starting position, making
the negative portion of the rep as slow and deliberate as the positive
portion.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, hold a weight plate on your
chest.
                      Straight-Leg Crunch
Start

Lie faceup on the floor with your legs straight up in the air.



Move

Curl up as high as you can to bring your shoulders and upper back off the
floor. Hold this position for a second before slowly lowering back to the
starting position.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, hold a weight plate on your
chest.




                          Decline Crunch
Start
Lie back in a decline bench with your feet secured under the foot pad.
Cup your hands behind your head, or place them by your ears as shown.



Move

Curl up as high as you can to bring your shoulders and upper back off the
bench, simultaneously pressing your lower back into the bench. Hold this
position for a second before slowly lowering back to the starting position.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, hold a weight plate on your
chest.




                    Roman Chair Crunch
Start

Sit facing up on a back extension bench so that your shins are touching
the ankle pads and your butt is on the bench.



Move
Extend back at the hips until your torso is below parallel with the floor
and then crunch up as high as possible. Slowly lower down and repeat for
reps. Focus on getting a good stretch in the abs in the start position,
which will make for a stronger contraction of the abs. Add resistance by
holding a weight plate on your chest.




                        Machine Crunch
Start

Sit in the machine crunch and select the proper weight.



Move

Keep your feet stationary and perform crunches as instructed in the
machine directions, focusing on the contraction of your abs. This is a
convenient way to add resistance to your ab work for better ab
development.




                      Exercise Ball Crunch
Start

Lie on your back on a stability ball with your feet flat on the floor.



Move

Curl up as high as you can to bring your shoulders and upper back off the
ball. Hold this position for a second before slowly lowering back to the
starting position.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, hold a weight plate on your
chest.
           Crunch With Medicine Ball Throw
Start

Get in a crunch position on the floor with your feet close to a sturdy wall
or exercise ball net. Hold a medicine ball overhead with your knees bent
and feet flat on the floor.



Move

Explosively crunch up as you simultaneously throw the medicine ball
from overhead at the wall. Maintain the upright position to catch the ball
on its return and allow it to take you down right into the next rep.
Exercise Ball Crunch With Medicine Ball Throw
Start

Lie on your back on a stability ball with your feet flat on the floor. Hold a
medicine ball with your arms extended back over your head.



Move

Curl up explosively to bring your shoulders and upper back as high as
possible off the ball while throwing the medicine ball to a training
partner. Hold the top position. Your partner then throws the ball back to
you. Use your abs to resist the direction of the ball and return to the
starting position.
                          Bicycle Crunch
Start

Lie flat so that your lower back is pressed to the floor. Place your hands
behind your head and lift your knees to about a 45-degree angle.



Move

Go through a bicycle pedaling motion with your legs as you alternately
touch your elbows to the opposite knees, twisting back and forth.
                          Cable Crunch
Start

Kneel facing a high-pulley cable with a rope attached to it. Grasp the
ends of the rope and bring your hands down to the top of your head,
where they remain fixed throughout the movement. Bend over at the
waist so that your back is almost parallel with the floor.



Move

Curl your torso down to bring your elbows toward your knees. Hold this
position and flex your abs for a second before slowly going back to the
starting position.
                   Standing Cable Crunch
Start

Stand with your back toward a high-pulley cable with a rope attached to
it. Grasp the end of the rope with a neutral grip and bring your hands
down to your collarbone. Your feet are shoulder-width apart and your
knees are slightly bent.



Move

Curl your torso down to bring your elbows toward your knees. Hold this
position and flex your abs for a second before slowly going back to the
starting position.

Note: This exercise can be done seated, as shown in the photo.
                   Smith Machine Crunch
Start

Place a bench in the middle of a Smith machine. Lie faceup on the bench
with your knees bent and feet flat on the bench. The bar should line up
over your upper abs as you hold the bar at arm’s length above you with
your back flat on the bench.



Move

Use your abs to explosively lift your torso up as high as you can, pushing
the bar up as your body rises. Slowly lower your upper body to the bench
and repeat for reps.
                       Bell Tower Crunch
Start

Attach a rope handle to a high cable pulley, or grab the end of the cable
as shown. Grab the rope with your left hand above your right hand and
stand in a staggered stance with your right leg in front of your left.



Move

Using your abs and obliques, pull the rope down in front of you and
toward your right knee (flexing and rotating your spine). Hold this
position for a second as you exhale and squeeze your abs as tight as
possible. Slowly return to the start position and repeat for reps. When
you have completed all reps on the right side, switch your foot and hand
position and perform in a similar manner on the left.
                                 V-Up
Start

Sit at the end of a flat bench with your hands grasping the edges and your
feet off the floor. Lean back until your body is almost straight and
parallel to the floor.



Move

Start with your legs straight, then bring your knees toward your chest
while simultaneously curling your upper body toward your knees to form
a V at the waist. Return your legs and torso to the starting position.
                         Dumbbell V-Sit
Start

Lie faceup on the floor. Arms are fully extended overhead and resting on
the floor. Hold a dumbbell with both hands.



Move

Contract your abs to flex your spine, slowly drawing your legs and
shoulders off the floor. Crunch hard until your feet and hands point at the
ceiling and your body is in a V position. Slowly lower back to the
starting position.
                        Reverse Crunch
Start

Lie faceup on the floor with your hands extended at your sides. Feet are
up and thighs are perpendicular to the floor (your hips and knees should
form a 90-degree angle).



Move

Slowly bring your knees toward your chest, lifting your hips and glutes
off the floor. Try to maintain the bend in your knees throughout the
movement. Return to the starting position under control.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, perform it on a decline bench
with your head on the high end.
                   Incline Reverse Crunch
Start

Lie on an incline, such as on a decline bench or raised ab board, with
your head where your feet normally go. Hold on to the leg pads to hold
your torso in place on the bench. Bend your hips and knees to 90-degree
angles for the start position of the reverse crunch.



Move

Maintain the bend in your knees and hips and flex your spine from the
bottom to lift your hips up off the bench and curl your knees toward your
head. Slowly reverse the motion to return your legs to the start position.
               Exercise Ball Reverse Crunch
Start

Place an exercise ball next to an exercise machine or other apparatus that
you can grab for stability. Lie on your back on the stability ball with your
feet up and thighs perpendicular to the floor (your hips and knees should
form a 90-degree angle). Reach back over your head and grab on to the
apparatus for stability.



Move

Slowly bring your knees toward your chest, lifting your hips and glutes
off the ball. Try to maintain the bend in your knees throughout the
movement. Return to the starting position under control.
                            Hip Thrust
Start

Lie faceup on the floor with your hands extended at your sides. Your legs
are perpendicular to the floor.



Move

Raise your hips and glutes straight up off the floor by using your
abdominals. Hold for a second in this position, then lower your hips back
to the starting position.
                Smith Machine Hip Thrust
Start

Lie on your back on a bench or on the floor or on a flat bench in the
middle of a Smith machine. Place your feet on the bottom of the bar and
roll the bar with your feet to unlatch the safety hooks. Extend your legs
straight up while supporting the bar with the soles of your feet. Your
body should form an L in this position with your hips bent at about 90
degrees and your knees fairly straight. Hold on to the machine or place
your hands firmly on the floor or on the bench at your sides.



Move

Use your lower abs to lift your legs straight up as high as you can go.
Hold the top position for a second and then slowly lower your legs until
your butt and lower back are on the floor.
                     Hanging Knee Raise
Start

Position yourself on a vertical bench and hang from it with your torso
straight and your knees slightly bent.



Move

Lift your legs, bending your knees on the way up to pull your knees up
toward your chest while rounding your lower back to bring your glutes
forward and up. Pause in this position for a second, then slowly lower
your legs to the starting position.

Note: This exercise can also be done hanging from a chin-up bar.
                      Hanging Leg Raise
Start

Position yourself on a vertical bench with your entire body completely
straight.
Move

Keeping your legs straight, lift your legs up as high past parallel with the
floor as possible by flexing at the waist while rounding your lower back
to bring your glutes forward and up. Pause in this position for a second,
then slowly lower your legs to the starting position.

Note: This exercise can also be done hanging from a chin-up bar.




                       Exercise Ball Tuck
Start

Lie on the floor in a push-up position with your feet resting on top of an
exercise ball.
Move
Tuck your knees in toward your chest while rolling the ball forward.
Hold the tucked position for a second, and then return to the starting
position by extending your legs back.




                         TRX Knee Tuck
Start

Get on the floor in a push-up position with your feet placed in the stirrups
of a TRX. Adjust the TRX handles so that they are just above the floor



Move

Tuck your knees in toward your chest. Hold the tucked position for a
second, and then return to the starting position by extending your legs
back.
                        Band Rising Knee
Start

Attach a band to a stable structure as low to the floor as possible and
attach the other end of the band to your left ankle with an ankle cuff.
Stand in a fighting stance with your right foot in front of your left.



Move

As quickly and as explosively as possible, drive your knee up toward
your chest as high as possible and return your foot back to the start
position. Complete all reps on the left leg and then perform in the same
way with your right leg.
                       Crossover Crunch
Start
Lie faceup on the floor with your knees bent and feet flat on the floor.
Cup your hands behind your head or place them at the sides of your head.



Move

Curl up as high as you can, bringing your left shoulder and upper back
off the floor. Simultaneously bring your left elbow across your body
toward your right knee. Hold at the top for a second, then slowly lower
yourself back to the starting position. Repeat on the right side and
continue alternating sides in this manner.
                Reaching Crossover Crunch
Start

Lie on your back, knees bent and feet flat on the floor. Hold your arms
extended a few inches off the floor alongside your hips.



Move

Raise your left shoulder and upper back off the floor as you reach with
your left arm across your torso to your right knee. Return to the start and
repeat on the right side.
                         Oblique Crunch
Start

Lie on the floor on your right side with your hips and knees bent. Cup
your left hand behind your head and place your right hand across your
body. Placing your hand on your obliques can help you feel the muscles
contract and enhance the mind–muscle connection.



Move

Contract your obliques to lift your shoulder off the floor. Hold this
position for a second, contracting your obliques as hard as possible, then
return to the start position. Complete all reps on the left side and then
repeat on the right side.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, hold a weight plate on your
chest.




                     Dumbbell Side Bend
Start
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart while holding a dumbbell with
a neutral grip in your left hand with your arm hanging at your side.



Move

Bend sideways at the waist to the right as low as possible using your
oblique muscles to pull your torso down. Hold for a second and return to
the starting position. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat on
the left side.




            Standing Cable Oblique Crunch
Start

Stand with your right side toward a high-pulley cable with a single-
handle D-grip attached to the pulley. Grip the handle with your right
hand, palm up, and bring it toward your temple while keeping your
elbow tucked tightly at your side.
Move

Contract though your obliques, pulling your torso down to the right.
Pause a moment in this position before slowly returning to the starting
position. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat on the left side.




           Standing Cable Oblique Pushdown
Start

Attach a D-handle to a high cable pulley and, if possible, adjust it to just
above hip height. Stand sideways to the pulley station with your right
side closest to the pulley and right hand holding on to the handle
attachment. Straighten your arm to create tension on the cable.



Move
Bend down on your right side, pushing the handle down toward the floor
just outside your right foot. Focus on contracting your oblique muscle in
this down position and then slowly return upright to the starting position.
Perform all reps on the right side then repeat on the left.




             Kneeling Oblique Cable Crunch
Start

Face a high cable pulley with a rope attached to it on your knees with
your body angled about 45 degrees from the pulley. Grab the ends of the
rope with your right hand and keep your arm out in front of you with
your elbow bent about 90 degrees. Maintain this arm position throughout
the movement.



Move

Use your obliques and abs to bend at the waist, bringing your right elbow
down toward your right knee. Hold the bottom position for a second as
you contract your obliques and abs and then slowly return to the start and
repeat for reps. Once you have completed all reps on the right side,
repeat on the left.




                          Side Jackknife
Start

Lie on the floor on your right side, keeping your left leg over your right
one. Both legs are straight. Place your right hand in a comfortable
position and cup your left hand behind your head.



Move

As you pull with your obliques, bring your torso and left leg toward each
other. Hold the contraction briefly and lower slowly to the starting
position. Complete the desired number of reps and repeat on the other
side.
                           Russian Twist
Start

Lie faceup on the floor with your head about a foot (30.5 centimeters)
from a stable object such as an exercise machine. Extend your arms
overhead to grab the apparatus for stabilizing your torso. Lift your legs
straight up so that they are perpendicular to the floor.



Move

Slowly lower your legs to the floor on your right side. Reverse the
movement to bring them back up above you and then lower them to the
left side.

Note: To make this exercise more difficult, add resistance by holding a
medicine ball between your knees.
            Standing Medicine Ball Rotation
Start

Stand straight with knees slightly bent. Hold a medicine ball with both
hands at shoulder level. Your training partner assumes the same position
behind you but without a medicine ball.



Move

Keeping your lower body in place, rotate your torso to one side and pass
the ball high to your partner, who has simultaneously rotated in that same
direction. Then rotate in the other direction and receive the ball back
from your partner, this time in a lower position (hands at your waist
rather than at shoulder level). Continue passing and receiving the ball in
this fashion for the desired number of reps. Then do the same number of
reps beginning with the ball high on the other side.
                  Band Roundhouse Elbow
Start

Take a strength band and wrap it around a secure base such as a power
rack, machine, or other suitable structure. The band should be a little
below shoulder height. Attach a handle or ankle strap to the bands. Stand
sideways to the attachment point of the bands with your left foot closest
to it. Slide your left arm through the handle so that the handle sits on the
inside of your elbow. Move your body far enough back from the band
attachment so that there is adequate tension. Take a shoulder-width
stance and hold your left arm out to the side with a full bend at the elbow.
Your elbow should be pointing straight out to your side. Hold your left
wrist with your right hand.



Move

Once in place, rotate about the waist in an explosive but controlled
fashion, contracting the abs and obliques and pivoting on the back foot
during the movement. Slowly return to the start position and repeat for
reps. After completing all reps on the left side, repeat on the right side.




                          Lying Leg Raise
Start
Lie faceup on the floor with your entire body straight and your hands at
your sides on the floor to stabilize your torso. Hold your legs a few
inches off the floor.



Move

Raise your legs up toward the ceiling until they are just short of
perpendicular to the floor. Slowly lower your legs back to the starting
position.
Note: To make this exercise more difficult, perform it on a decline bench
with your head on the higher end.




                            Scissor Kick
Start

Lie faceup on the floor with your entire body straight and your hands at
the sides of your head. Hold your legs a few inches off the floor.



Move

Make small, rapid, alternating up-and-down scissorlike motions as you
lift each leg about 45 degrees into the air and lower each until your heel
is a few inches off the floor.
                      Exercise Ball Pass
Start

Lie on your back with your legs and arms extended. Hold an exercise ball
in your hands.



Move

Raise the ball overhead with your arms while simultaneously bringing
your legs toward it. When your hands and feet meet, pass the ball from
your hands to your feet. Without pausing, lower your arms and legs back
down. Continue in alternating fashion.
                         Barbell Roll-Out
Start

Kneel on the floor in front of a loaded barbell and grab the barbell with
an overhand, shoulder-width group. Your arms should be straight and
your torso fairly upright in the start position.



Move

Allow the bar to roll forward as far as possible with just your knees and
toes touching the floor while you maintain your grip on the bar. The goal
is to be as flat as possible in the finish position with your torso and upper
legs parallel with floor and hovering just a couple inches above it. Then
reverse the motion to pull the bar back toward your knees until your body
is upright again. Repeat for as many reps as possible.
                  Dumbbell Woodchopper
Start

Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent.
Grasp a light dumbbell in both hands, holding it outside and above your
left shoulder.



Move

Slowly lower the dumbbell diagonally across your body until it is beside
your right hip. Reverse the direction, returning to the starting position.
Complete the desired number of reps, then repeat on the right side.
                      Cable Woodchopper
Start

Stand with your right side toward a high-pulley cable with a rope handle
attached to it. Grab the handle with both hands and hold it outside your
right shoulder in a similar manner to the start of the dumbbell
woodchopper exercise.



Move

Pull the handle across the front of your body to your left hip. Slowly
resist the handle back to the starting position. Complete the desired
number of reps and repeat on the left side.
                      Band Woodchopper
Start

Stand with your left side facing the attachment point of the band set
above shoulder height. Grab the band with both hands, just like an ax,
and hold it outside your left shoulder in a manner similar to the start of
an actual swing with an ax.



Move

Explosively pull the band across the front of your body to the outside of
your right hip as though really swinging an ax. Slowly resist the band
back to the start position. Complete the desired number of reps on one
side and then repeat on the other side.
                                Plank
Start

Get into a modified push-up position by balancing your body on your
forearms and toes with your body in a straight line from head to feet.



Move

Hold this position for the prescribed amount of time while pulling your
abs in and keeping your hips from dropping toward the floor.
                              Side Plank
Start

Get in a side plank position by lying on your right side on the floor with
your left foot rested on top of the inner side of your right foot and your
left arm rested on top of your left side. Raise your body by placing your
right forearm flat on the floor so that it's perpendicular to your torso. Lift
your torso until your right upper arm is straight underneath you with your
elbow bent 90 degrees and your forearm flat on the floor. In this position,
only your right forearm and the outer side of your right foot are making
contact with the floor and your body forms a diagonal line that is at about
a 20-degree angle to the floor.



Move
Keep your abs pulled in tight and hold this position for as long as you
can and then repeat on the left side.




             Side Plank With Reach-Through
Start

Get in a side plank position with your right arm as described in the side
plank exercise.



Move

Raise your left arm straight above you. Then lower your arm under the
opposite armpit and through the other side as you turn your body from a
sideways position to facing down toward the floor. Then reverse the
motion to bring your arm back up above you. Focus on getting a good
stretch in your rear delts and middle traps as your arm reaches the top
position. When you have completed all reps on one side, repeat on the
opposite side.
                            Chapter 25
                            Whole Body
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of the exercises that involve multiple
joints and use multiple large muscle groups of the upper and lower body. Not
only are these great exercises for building sheer power and strength, but they
make great cardio alternatives, especially with techniques such as Power HIIT,
Tabatas, and cardioacceleration as discussed in chapter 12. These exercises are
divided into barbell whole-body exercises and dumbbell, kettlebell, and
medicine ball whole-body exercises. Wherever a certain type of exercise is used
in a workout, any one of the same type can be substituted.
Barbell Whole-Body Exercises
    Deadlift
    Hex Bar Deadlift
    Dead Landmine
    Dead Curl Press
    Snatch
    Clean and Jerk
    Power Clean
    Hang Power Clean
    High Pull
    Hang Pull
    Smith Machine Hang Power Clean
    Dumbbell High Pull
    Push Press
    Overhead Squat

Dumbbell, Kettlebell, and Medicine Ball Whole-Body Exercises
    Dumbbell Deadlift
    Dumbbell Clean and Jerk
    One-Arm Dumbbell Snatch
    Dumbbell Power Clean
    Dumbbell Hang Clean
    Dumbbell Push Press
    Dumbbell Overhead Squat
    Power Dumbbell Raise
    Kettlebell Snatch
    Kettlebell Swing
    Medicine Ball Overhead Throw
    Medicine Ball Slam
    Squat–Jump–Push–Press
    Dumbbell Squat and Overhead Press
    Dumbbell Push-Up and Row
    Dumbbell Deadlift and Upright Row



                                  Deadlift
   Start

   Stand over a loaded barbell resting on the floor with a hip-width stance.
   Your shins should touch the bar. Squat down to grab the bar using a
   staggered grip. Your hands should be about shoulder-width apart. Your
   torso should be bent at 45 degrees over the bar and your arms should be
   tensed and pulling on the bar. Your thighs are slightly higher than parallel
   with the floor.



   Move

   Keep your abs pulled in tight and tense your entire body. Drive through
your heels to straighten your knees and bring your hips forward until you
are in a standing position. Once standing, bring your shoulders back
slightly and pause. Lower the barbell along the same path (close to your
body all the way down) to the floor. Touch the plates lightly to the floor
and begin your next rep.

Note: For a detailed description on using the deadlift for maximal
strength, as well as doing the sumo deadlift, see chapter 8.




                         Hex Bar Deadlift
Start

Stand in the middle of a loaded hex bar and squat to grab the handles. In
the start position your thighs should be just above parallel with the floor
with your torso bent forward at about a 45-degree angle with the floor.



Move

Drive your heels through the floor as you extend at the knees and hips to
reach a fully upright position and then slowly lower the bar to the floor.
You can lift significantly more weight in hex bar deadlifts than in
traditional deadlifts, and hex bar deadlifts use more of the quadriceps and
place less stress on the lower back.




                         Dead Landmine
Start

Load one end of a barbell with weight and place the opposite and empty
end of the barbell on the floor or in a landmine base. Stand facing the
loaded end of the barbell with the weight plate in between your feet and
your left foot closer to the end of the barbell. Squat and grab the barbell
using an underhand grip with your left hand and an overhand grip with
the right.



Move

Extend at the hips and knees to drive the weighted end of the barbell off
the floor. As the weight passes your hips, use your arms to continue
lifting the bar as you pivot your feet to swing the end of the bar across
your chest and toward your right side. Continue pivoting your feet as you
lower the bar to the floor on the right side. Once the barbell touches the
floor, repeat on the right side to swing it over to the left side and repeat
for the prescribed number of reps or time interval.
                         Dead Curl Press
Start

Place a barbell on the floor in front of you to assume a deadlift start with
your hands reversed in an underhand grip so that the palms are facing
forward.



Move

Deadlift the barbell to the midthigh and then immediately curl the barbell
into a biceps curl to the shoulders; immediately complete the movement
with a reverse barbell shoulder press. Reverse these movements to return
the bar to the floor and repeat for reps.
                                Snatch
Start

Stand over a barbell placed on the floor. Your legs are hip-width apart
and your shins are about an inch (2.5 centimeters) from the bar. Squat
down and grab the barbell with a very wide overhand grip. Your
shoulders should be over the barbell and your back should be tightly
arched.



Move

With one smooth motion, forcefully extend at the hips and knees as you
swing the barbell forward and up with your arms. The extension at the
hips and knees should be minimal—just enough to start the barbell
moving from the floor. Immediately squat back down by flexing at the
hips and knees as you extend the barbell straight overhead. With the
barbell extended straight overhead, forcefully extend at the hips and
knees to stand straight up. Return the barbell to the floor.




                         Clean and Jerk
Start

Squat and grab a loaded barbell bar resting on the floor using an
overhand grip with your feet spaced about hip-width apart. Your hands
should be about shoulder-width apart with your shins about an inch from
the bar. Your torso should be bent at 45 degrees over the bar, and your
arms should be tensed and pulling on the bar. Your thighs will be slightly
higher than parallel with the floor.



Move

Keep your abs pulled in tight as you drive explosively through your heels
to straighten your knees and hips to lift the bar to hip height. Immediately
pull the bar up to shoulder height as you squat under it to catch it on your
upper chest and shoulders. Extend at the hips and knees to stand straight
up with a slight bend in the knees. Extend forcefully at the knees and
hips as you press the bar straight overhead. You can perform the press
with your feet stationary. Or you can split your legs to drive one foot
forward and the other back, then bring your legs together while keeping
your arms extended overhead. Return the bar back to the starting
position.
                           Power Clean
Start

Stand over a loaded barbell resting on the floor with your feet spaced
hip-width apart. Your shins are about an inch (2.5 centimeters) from the
bar. Squat to grab the bar using an overhand grip. Your hands should be
spaced about shoulder-width apart. Your torso should be bent at 45
degrees over the bar with your arms tensed and pulling on the bar. Your
thighs are slightly higher than parallel with the floor.



Move

Keep your abs pulled in tight and tense your entire body. Drive
explosively through your heels to straighten your knees and bring your
hips forward until the bar is at hip height. Pull the bar up to your
shoulders and squat under the bar as you catch it on your shoulders and
whip your arms around so that the elbows are pointing forward. Extend
at the hips and knees so that you are standing straight up with a slight
bend in the knees with the bar resting on your upper chest.




                       Hang Power Clean
Move

This exercise is performed similar to a power clean but the bar starts just
below the knees.




                              High Pull
Start

The first part of the movement is the same as for the clean and jerk.



Move

When the bar reaches thigh level, explosively move it upward by
extending the hip, knee, and ankle joints in a jumping motion. When you
reach full extension, shrug your shoulders. Then pull with your arms,
bringing the bar as high as possible. Slowly lower the bar and reset.
                             Hang Pull
Start

Stand while holding a barbell in front of your knees with an overhand
grip. Both your hands and feet are shoulder-width apart. Your knees are
slightly bent and your torso is leaned forward slightly.



Move

Pull the bar upward in an explosive manner by extending the hip, knee,
and ankle joints in a jumping motion. Simultaneously shrug your
shoulders, then pull with your arms, bringing the bar as high as possible.
Slowly lower the bar to thigh level.
           Smith Machine Hang Power Clean
Start

Stand in the middle of the Smith machine and position the bar at just
above knee height. Take an overhand grip (I suggest a hook grip where
the fingers wrap over the thumb) on the bar outside of shoulder width
and unhook the bar from the machine. Your arms should be fully
extended with your head and chest up. Your elbows should be pointed
out with your shoulders back and down. Your hips should be back and
knees should be slightly bent.



Move

Initiate the movement by forcefully extending the hips, knees, and
ankles, accelerating into the bar. Use your traps to initiate pulling the bar
up and transfer that motion into the shoulders to continue raising the bar.
Once your lower body has reached full extension, bend the hips and
knees again to lower your receiving position. Allow the arms to flex at
this point, rotating the elbows around the bar to receive it on your
shoulders. Extend through the hips and knees to come to a standing
position with the bar racked on your shoulders to complete the
movement. Lower the bar to the start position and repeat for reps.




                      Dumbbell High Pull
Start

Stand while holding the dumbbells in front of your thighs with an
overhand grip. Both your hands and feet are shoulder-width apart. Your
knees are slightly bent and your torso is leaning forward slightly.



Move

Pull the dumbbells upward in an explosive manner by extending the hip,
knee, and ankle joints in a jumping motion. Simultaneously shrug your
shoulders, then pull with your arms, bringing the dumbbells as high as
possible. Slowly lower the dumbbells to thigh level.




                             Push Press
Start

Assume a front squat starting position.
Move

Bend slightly at the knees and then explode upward onto the balls of your
feet, simultaneously pressing the bar overhead. Hold this position for a
split second before returning to the bent-knee position.




                         Overhead Squat
Start

Press a barbell straight overhead with a wider-than-shoulder-width grip.
Lock out your arms and hold the bar overhead.



Move

Squat down into a full squat, pause at the bottom, and return to a standing
position while holding the bar overhead.
                       Dumbbell Deadlift
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart with a dumbbell on the floor
outside of each foot. Squat down to grab the dumbbells using a neutral
grip. Your torso is bent at 45 degrees over the floor with your arms
tensed and pulling on the dumbbells. Your thighs are slightly higher than
parallel with the floor.



Move

Keep your abs pulled in tight and tense your entire body, then drive
through your heels to straighten your knees and bring your hips forward
until you are in a standing position with the dumbbells at your sides.
Once standing, bring your shoulders back slightly and pause. Lower the
dumbbells along the same path to the floor. Touch the weights lightly to
the floor and begin your next rep.
                 Dumbbell Clean and Jerk
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart with a dumbbell on the floor
outside of each foot. Squat down to grab the dumbbells using a neutral
grip. Your torso is bent at 45 degrees over the floor with your arms
tensed and pulling on the dumbbells. Your thighs are slightly higher than
parallel with the floor.



Move

Keep your abs pulled in tight, and tense your entire body. Drive
explosively through your heels to straighten your knees and bring your
hips forward until the dumbbells are at hip height. Pull the dumbbells up
to your shoulders and squat under them as you catch them on your
shoulders and whip your arms around so that the elbows are pointing
forward. Extend at the hips and knees so that you are standing straight up
with a slight bend in the knees and with the dumbbells resting on your
shoulders. Extend forcefully at the knees and hips as you press the
dumbbells straight overhead. You can also use a split stance as shown.
Return the dumbbells back to the starting position.




                One-Arm Dumbbell Snatch
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart with a dumbbell on the floor in
the middle of your feet. Squat down to grab the dumbbell using an
overhand grip with your right hand. Your torso is bent at 45 degrees over
the floor with your arm tensed and pulling on the dumbbell. Your thighs
are slightly higher than parallel with the floor.



Move

With one smooth motion, forcefully extend at the hips and knees as you
pull the dumbbell up keeping it close to your body. The extension at the
hips and knees should be minimal—just enough to start the dumbbells
moving from the floor. Immediately squat back down by flexing at the
hips and knees as you extend the dumbbell straight overhead. With the
dumbbell extended straight overhead, forcefully extend at the hips and
knees to stand straight up. Return the dumbbell back to the floor, and
repeat on the left side.
                   Dumbbell Power Clean
Start

Stand with your feet hip-width apart with a dumbbell on the floor outside
of each foot. Squat down to grab the dumbbells using a neutral grip. Your
torso is bent at 45 degrees over the floor with your arms tensed and
pulling on the dumbbells. Your thighs are slightly higher than parallel
with the floor.



Move

Keep your abs pulled in tight, and tense your entire body. Drive
explosively through your heels to straighten your knees and bring your
hips forward until the dumbbells are at hip height. Pull the dumbbells up
to your shoulders and squat under them as you catch them on your
shoulders and whip your arms around so that the elbows are pointing
forward. Extend at the hips and knees so that you are standing straight up
with a slight bend in the knees and with the dumbbells resting on your
shoulders. Carefully return the dumbbells to the floor.




                    Dumbbell Hang Clean
Move

This exercise is similar to the dumbbell power clean, but you start by
holding the dumbbells at the sides of your thighs.
                     Dumbbell Push Press
Move

This exercise is similar to the part of the dumbbell clean and jerk where
the dumbbells rest on your shoulders.
                Dumbbell Overhead Squat
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and extend the dumbbells over
your head and lock your wrists and elbows.



Move

Keeping your heels flat on the floor, squat down as close to parallel as
you can, shifting the dumbbells back behind your head to counterbalance
the movement. Come back up to the start position all the while keeping
your abs tight and chest out.




                   Power Dumbbell Raise
Start
Stand erect while holding a pair of dumbbells at your sides. Knees are
slightly bent, feet are shoulder-width apart, and toes are slightly pointed
out.



Move

Bend your knees slightly and then straighten them as you raise the
dumbbells up toward your armpits. As the weights approach that
position, push off the balls of your feet.




                         Kettlebell Snatch
Start

In a shoulder-width stance with a kettlebell between your feet, squat to
grasp the kettlebell with your left hand while keeping your torso at a 45-
degree angle with the floor.
Move

Explode up by extending at the hips, knees, and ankles. Drive your heels
into the floor as you pull the kettlebell up, keeping it close to your body.
As the kettlebell reaches your head, allow the momentum it has gathered
to swing over and end up on the top side of your forearm with your arm
extended straight overhead. Reverse the motion to lower the kettlebell to
the floor and then immediately perform in the same way with your right
arm. Alternate arms each time until you have completed the desired
number of reps or amount of time.
                        Kettlebell Swing
Start

Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart holding the kettlebell with both
arms in front of you.



Move

Drop your hips back and down just as you would sit in a chair, allowing
the kettlebell to swing down in between your legs. Use your legs and hips
to explosively extend at the knees and hips to swing the kettlebell up.
The most important aspect of the lift is the hip thrust. As you swing the
kettlebell up, you are not using your shoulders or your arms to help the
kettlebell up; all you should use is your hips.
        Medicine Ball Overhead Throw
Start
Hold a medicine ball with both hands in front of your upper chest.



Move

Squat and explode up as you launch the ball up overhead by explosively
extending your arms. As the ball leaves your hands, your feet should be
off the floor. Land on the ground with soft knees to absorb the force of
the landing and allow the ball to land on the floor, but make sure that it
doesn't land on you. Pick up the ball and repeat.




                      Medicine Ball Slam
Start

Hold a medicine ball with both hands in front of your chest.
Move
In an explosive manner, use your entire body to slam the medicine ball to
the floor. If the medicine ball bounces high enough, catch it and repeat
for the desired number of reps or time. If not, pick the medicine ball up
and repeat.




                  Squat–Jump–Push–Press
Start

In a shoulder-width stance, hold dumbbells at shoulder level so that your
palms face each other.



Move

Descend into a full squat and then explode upward, jumping out of the
squat as you press the weights to full extension so that your feet leave the
floor. As you land, lower the weights back to your shoulders, making
sure to bend your knees to “catch” them smoothly. Descend immediately
into another rep.




        Dumbbell Squat and Overhead Press
Start

Hold two dumbbells at shoulder level with the ends of the dumbbell
resting on the top of your shoulders. Keep your low back arched. Feet are
slightly wider than shoulder width and toes are pointed out slightly.



Move

Squat down, holding the dumbbells in position at shoulder level. Pause
for a second at the bottom when your thighs reach parallel with the
ground, then drive back up to the starting position. When your knees are
almost fully extended, press the dumbbells overhead. Finish with your
arms fully extended overhead with your elbows straight but not locked.
Slowly lower the dumbbells back to shoulder level and begin the next
rep.
               Dumbbell Push-Up and Row
Start

Place two dumbbells about shoulder-width apart on the floor. Get set in
the bottom of a push-up position with your hands holding on to the
weights. Place your feet about one to two feet (30.5 to 61 centimeters)
apart for support and balance.



Move

Press yourself up by extending your elbows until your upper body is
completely off the floor. When your elbows are fully extended, shift your
body weight to your right arm and row the left dumbbell up to your left
side, keeping your elbow as close to your body as possible. Lower the
dumbbell back to the floor, shift your body weight over to your left side,
and row the left dumbbell up to your right side. Lower the weight back to
the floor and then lower your upper body back to the floor by bending
your elbows. That completes one rep.




          Dumbbell Deadlift and Upright Row
Start

The start is similar to the start of the dumbbell deadlift.



Move

Drive through your legs to lift the weights to a standing position. From
there, go immediately into a dumbbell upright row, keeping the weights
close to your body and pulling them to mid-chest level. Slowly reverse
the movements to return the weights to the floor.
                           Chapter 26
                           Calisthenics
This chapter contains detailed descriptions of rhythmic calisthenic-type exercises
that generally use many muscles. The exercises covered in this chapter typically
make a great alternative to standard cardio, such as jogging, especially when
employing HIIT cardio methods, including standard HIIT, Tabatas, Power HIIT,
and cardioacceleration, as covered in chapter 12.

These exercises are not broken down into specific categories as the previous
exercise chapters are, but they are grouped with exercises that are similar in
nature. You can replace almost any one of these exercises with any other in this
chapter.



                            Bench Hop-Over
   Start

   Place your hands on the top of a flat weight bench with both feet on the
   left side of the bench toward the end of it.



   Move

   Hold the bench securely with both hands and hop your legs over the top
   of the bench and land them on the right side. Immediately hop back over
   to the left side. Keep hopping over the bench in this manner for the
   prescribed time.
                             Box Jump
Start

Stance facing a box or platform approximately a foot or so in front of you
with your arms down at your sides and legs slightly bent.



Move

Using your arms to aid in the initial burst, jump upward and forward,
landing with both feet simultaneously on top of the box. Immediately
drop back to the start position and continue in this manner.
                                Burpee
Start

Start in a standing position.



Move

Crouch down, placing your hands on the floor in front of you. Kick your
feet back into a solid plank push-up position and then bend your elbows
and execute a full push-up. Hop your feet toward your hands into a
crouch position. Use your legs to explode upward into a jump as high as
you can with your arms extended overhead. Land on the floor and repeat
for the desired number of reps or time.
                          Jumping Jack
Start

Stand with your arms at your sides and your feet together.



Move

In one movement, jump up and separate your legs as you raise your arms
to the sides and over your head. You should land with your arms over
your head and your feet more than hip-width apart. Immediately jump up
again and, in one movement, bring your legs together and your arms back
to your sides. That completes one jumping jack. Continue in this manner.
                          Lateral Bound
Start

Stand in a half-squat position.



Move

Allow your left leg to do a countermovement inward as you shift your
weight to the right leg. Immediately push off of your right foot to bound
to the left side as far as possible. Land on your left leg. After absorbing
the force by going down into a half squat, immediately push off your left
leg in the opposite direction, returning to the start position. Continue
back and forth in this manner.
                        Lateral Box Jump
Start
Stand to the right of a box that is less than knee height.



Move

Drop into a half squat and explode up to jump up and over, landing on
the top of the box. Absorb the impact by squatting slightly as you land.
Immediately jump down to the left side of the box, landing with soft
knees to absorb the force. Repeat in the other direction and continue this
way for the prescribed amount of time.
                       Mountain Climber
Start

Get in a push-up position with your weight supported by your hands and
toes. Flexing your knee and hip, bring one leg up until the knee is under
your chest.



Move

Explosively reverse the positions of your legs. Extend the bent leg until
the leg is straight back and supported by the toe, and bring the other foot
up with the hip and knee flexed until it is under your chest. Repeat in this
alternating fashion for the prescribed amount of time.
                   Side-to-Side Box Shuffle
Start

Stand to one side of a box with your left foot resting on the middle of it.



Move

Jump up and over to the other side of the box, landing with your right
foot on top of the box and your left foot on the floor. Swing your arms to
aid your movement. Continue shuffling back and forth across the box in
this manner.
                 Step-Up With Rising Knee
Start

Stand facing a box or bench that is anywhere from midshin to knee
height with your feet together.



Move

Put your right foot on the top of the bench and extend your hip and knee
to lift your body off of the floor. As your left leg passes the top of the
bench, flex your left hip and knee to perform a rising knee, bringing your
knee as high as you can. Reverse this motion to bring your left leg back
to the floor and then lower your right foot back to the floor. Repeat this
by stepping up with your left leg. Continue alternating legs like this for
the desired amount of time. The higher the box or bench, the more
intense the exercise will be. Perform the rising knee with explosive
power as though you are performing a knee strike.
                             Band Sprint
Start

Connect two resistance bands with handles to a stable structure. Hold the
bands securely in front of your shoulders.



Move

Sprint as far forward as you can and as explosively as possible. Then
quickly but carefully return to the start and repeat in this fashion for 20
seconds. This exercise is similar to running up a hill that gradually
increases in steepness; the farther you sprint from the base, the more
resistance the bands provide.
                  Part VI
     Nutrition for Maximizing Muscle
      Mass, Strength, and Fat Loss




Even if you’re following the proper training program, if you’re not eating
properly for your goals, then your results will be less than ideal. Having the
proper diet will help to fuel your workouts so you have more energy and strength
during the workout. And the proper diet will provide the right nutrients at the
right time needed for recovery after the workout.

There’s no doubt about it: Nutrition is a big part of the results you get from your
training program. And it’s a big part of maintaining health and general well-
being.

Part VI is not an all-encompassing section on nutrition for weightlifting. That
would make a book of its own. I’ve included this section to give you some
general guidelines on nutrition and supplementation to support your goals.

Chapter 27 contains guidelines on nutrition for maximizing muscle mass and
strength. This chapter includes ten nutrition goals and sample meal plans based
on the times you typically work out during the day. These diet guidelines will
work well with any of the programs in part IV of the book. This chapter also
presents an overview of the most critical dietary supplements to take while
following a weightlifting program. These are ingredients that enhance workout
performance and recovery as well as promote gains in muscle mass, strength,
and endurance and in some cases fat loss.
Chapter 28 presents nutrition guidelines for maximizing fat loss. It includes eight
steps to achieving fat loss.
                Chapter 27
     Nutrition for Maximizing Muscle
            Mass and Strength
When it comes to maximizing muscle mass and strength gains, the general rules
regarding nutrition are fairly the same. After all, building muscle mass and
muscle strength go hand in hand to some degree. So nutrient requirements and
timing are very similar whether you are trying to maximize muscle hypertrophy
or muscle strength. And more often than not, you are trying to do both at the
same time.

As mentioned in the introduction to this part, there is not enough room in this
book to provide you with all the nutrition basics you will need to understand.
However, the guidelines here will serve you well in meeting your goals.

These guidelines are what I have found to be most effective over decades of
working with people to maximize muscle growth and strength naturally. They
are backed by science done in the lab, but more important they are backed by
real-world evidence in the gym on literally millions of people using them over
the years. I’ve divided the guidelines into 10 goals to focus on with your diet.
After the goals are sample meal plans based on the goals; you will discover how
to incorporate these plans into your day based on when you work out.


                   Goal 1: Focus on Protein
Muscle is made of protein. To build muscle, you need to boost muscle protein
synthesis as well as decrease muscle breakdown. Research in the lab and the
gym confirms that the best way to do this is with a diet that gets you a minimum
of 1 gram per pound of body weight (a little over 2 grams of protein per
kilogram of body weight) and even closer to about 1.5 grams of protein per
pound of body weight (about 3 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight)
per day. This is especially true for those following more intense training
programs.
Several studies support the notion that getting up to 1.5 grams of protein per
pound of body weight is effective for producing better gains in muscle mass.
Victoria University (Australia) researchers had weight-trained men consume
about 1.5 grams of protein per pound of body weight per day or 0.75 gram of
protein per pound during an 11-week weight training program (Cribb et al.
2007). The higher protein intake was achieved by supplementing with whey
protein. The men who ingested the higher protein gained significantly greater
strength and muscle fiber protein in the quadriceps than the control group did. In
a 2006 study by Candow and colleagues, male and female participants
supplemented with either whey protein or soy protein to bump up their daily
protein intake to about 1.5 grams per pound of body weight per day during 6
weeks of weight training. The control group consumed about 0.75 gram of
protein per pound. The participants getting the greater protein, regardless of the
source, had significantly greater gains in muscle strength and growth. And in a
study by Burke and colleagues (2001), participants’ protein intake was increased
to 1.5 grams per pound of body weight per day during 6 weeks of weight
training with whey protein, while control participants consumed 0.5 gram of
protein per pound. At the end of the six weeks the participants getting the extra
protein gained significantly more strength and muscle mass. A 2011 study by
Witard and colleagues has also shown that even in endurance athletes, when they
double their protein intake to close to 1.5 grams per pound of body weight per
day when training intensity is increased, they recover better and maintain better
performance.

Despite these studies and the many others that confirm that higher protein intake
produces better gains in muscle strength and mass, many misinformed dieticians,
doctors, and scientists still believe that protein requirements for those who
weight train are not that much different than for sedentary people who do little to
no exercise. This is because there is also research showing that increasing
protein intake during a weight-training program has little impact on muscle
growth or strength gains.

A review study (Bosse and Dixon 2012) on protein intake and strength training
finally gives us an answer to why some studies show that higher protein intakes
produce better gains in muscle mass and strength and why others show that it
doesn’t. Many studies do not show a benefit of increased protein intake because
protein intake was not increased enough from their baseline diets or protein
intake was not increased enough compared to the lower-protein group. However,
when you look at studies that increase protein intake by almost double the
participants’ baseline intake or increase protein intake by at least 50 percent of
that consumed by the lower-protein group or control group, then high protein
intake does lead to significant gains in lean muscle mass and muscle strength.

The bottom line is that eating a higher-protein diet is effective for gaining more
muscle and increasing muscle strength. Shoot for 1 to 1.5 grams of protein per
pound of body weight for optimal results.


                     Goal 2: Get Ample Fat
Many people still are misguided when it comes to dietary fat. There is still a
tendency to believe that you must keep fat low to be fit and healthy. Yet nothing
could be further from the truth. Fat is an important macronutrient for anyone
interested in building muscle and gaining strength as well as optimizing health.

One reason you need to take in adequate fat is that your body needs certain types
of fat, such as omega-3 fat (from fatty fish like salmon). This type of fat has
recently been found to be a critical player in muscle recovery and growth. It also
keeps body fat at bay, aids joint health, protects from heart disease, and boosts
brain function, among other benefits. A study by Smith and colleagues (2011)
suggests that those supplementing with fish oil have a higher anabolic response
(higher rates of muscle protein synthesis) when consuming protein, which can
lead to greater muscle growth in the long run.

Then there is monounsaturated fat. This is not an essential fat, but it is a healthy
fat because it provides numerous health benefits and is readily burned for fuel
rather than stored as body fat. On top of that, male athletes consuming more
monounsaturated fat maintain higher testosterone levels (Hamalainen et al.
1983; Reed et al. 1987). Actually, male athletes consuming more
monounsaturated fat and saturated fat maintain higher testosterone levels. So,
yes, you actually should try to consume some saturated fat rather than try to
avoid it at all costs. Good sources are beef, dairy (full fat or reduced fat, but not
fat-free), and whole eggs. The only fat that you want to avoid is trans fat. The
Malmo Diet and Cancer Study reported that individuals receiving more than 30
percent of their total daily energy from fat and more than 10 percent from
saturated fat did not have increased mortality (Leosdottir et al. 2005).

A simple rule for fat intake is to consume half your body weight in pounds (or
about your entire body weight in kilograms) in grams of fat. So, if you weigh
200 pounds (90 kg), you would consume about 100 grams of fat per day, 33
percent of it as monounsaturated fat, 33 percent as polyunsaturated fat (mainly
omega-3 fat), and 33 percent as saturated fat each day. Also consider
supplementing with 4 to 10 grams of fish oil per day. If you really want to fine-
tune this recommendation, look to see how much DHA (docosahexaenoic acid)
and EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) your fish oil provides per capsule and try to get
close to 1500 milligrams DHA and 1800 milligrams of EPA per day for maximal
benefits.


          Goal 3: Manipulate Carbohydrate
Because you want to make sure you’re eating ample protein and ample fat for
maximizing muscle growth, the amounts of these two critical macronutrients
should stay about the same regardless of where you are in your diet or your
goals. That means to gain more mass or to lose more fat you should change your
carb intake. The body can make all the glucose (blood sugar) it needs from
protein and fat. So there is no essential carbohydrate you need from your diet.
Unlike with essential fat you need to consume, and with protein there are
essential amino acids you need to consume because the body doesn’t make them.

For maximizing muscle growth and strength gains while minimizing fat gains,
start off somewhere around 1.5 to 2.0 grams of carbohydrate per pound of body
weight. Then you can either increase this amount if you find that you are not
gaining mass rapidly enough and are not gaining any body fat. Similarly, you
can also gradually lower this amount if you find that you are gaining too much
body fat. Everyone’s body is different, and your body will respond to
carbohydrate differently. So you need to experiment with carbohydrate intake.


                    Goal 4: Count Calories
Calorie intake is important for building muscle and strength because you need to
be in a positive energy balance (consuming more calories than you are burning)
to truly maximize muscle growth. However, if you are hitting the proper amount
of protein and fat and have your carb intake dialed in for your body, then how far
over your energy needs or under you are doesn’t really matter . . . to a point. As
stated in rule 3, it is possible to gain muscle while losing body fat. That being
said, to maximize muscle mass, you should be eating more calories than you are
burning each day. And to maximize fat loss, you should be burning more
calories than you are consuming. However, it is possible to burn slightly more
calories than you are consuming yet gain muscle because you are eating ample
amounts of protein and fat. We know that 1 gram of protein provides 4 calories,
as does 1 gram of carbs. We also know that 1 gram of fat provides about 9
calories (8 to 10 calories, depending on the type of fat). If you build a diet from
the macronutrients up and want to be sure to get in 1.5 grams of protein per
pound of body weight and 0.5 gram of fat per pound of body weight, then that is
about 11 calories per pound of body weight. If you shoot for about 1 to 2 grams
of carbohydrate per pound of body weight, then you know that you should be
eating at least 15 calories per pound of body weight to build muscle. If you find
you need a good 3 grams of carbohydrate per pound of body weight, then you
need about 23 calories per pound.


                     Goal 5: Eat Frequently
It makes sense that if you’re trying to eat ample amounts of protein, fat,
carbohydrate, and total calories every day, then a smart strategy is to eat frequent
meals throughout the day. Decades of experience show that bodybuilders who
eat more frequent meals build more muscle. Just about every top-level
professional bodybuilder consumes a meal every couple of hours. These are men
who carry the most muscle mass in the world. And on the other end of the
spectrum, newborn infants, the smallest humans in the world, eat every 2 to 3
hours during the first few months of life when it is absolutely critical that they
rapidly gain mass.

All this anecdotal evidence is interesting; however, clinical research also
supports this notion that more frequent meals better promote muscle growth. In a
study by Moore and colleagues (2012), participants performed a leg workout and
then ate a total of 80 grams of whey protein over the next 12 hours in three
methods. They consumed eight 10-gram doses of whey protein every 1.5 hours,
or consumed four 20-gram doses of whey every 3 hours, or consumed two 40-
gram doses of whey every 6 hours. The researchers reported that protein net
balance, which is essentially muscle protein synthesis minus muscle protein
breakdown, was significantly greater when they consumed the four 20-gram
doses of whey protein every 3 hours as compared to the other two dosing
strategies. Greater protein net balance essentially means more muscle growth.
There are a couple of take-home points from this study. The first has to do with
amounts of protein. That the 10-gram doses of whey every 1.5 hours did not lead
to greater protein net balance than the 20-gram doses every 3 hours is more a
message about protein quantity than frequency. So you need to get an adequate
dose of protein at each meal, and the minimum appears to be 20 grams. They
didn’t look at higher doses taken more frequently, but I would suggest shooting
for 20 to 40 grams of protein per meal depending on the source.

The second take-home point of the study is that, to maximize muscle growth,
you should not go much longer than 3 hours between meals. Any longer than
this appears to increase protein breakdown too much so that any major boost in
protein synthesis you get is just making up for the breakdown and not
maximizing the potential for muscle growth. So your meals should be spaced no
more than 3 hours apart throughout the day, and each meal should have about 20
to 40 grams of protein.


        Goal 6: Use a Mixed Protein Powder
Using a protein powder can definitely help you get in your needed protein intake
of 1 to 1.5 grams of protein per pound of body weight per day. But using a
protein powder isn’t just convenient; it also provides direct benefits for muscle
growth, if you use the right kind.

For the best protein powder, you definitely want to have some form of whey
protein. Whey protein is a milk protein. Milk contains two primary types of
protein: whey and casein. Whey is the soluble portion of milk protein, making
up 20 percent of the protein, while casein is the globular portion and makes up
the remaining 80 percent. So whey starts out as whole milk from cows. The
whey is separated from the casein in the cheese manufacturing process. It’s
literally drained off and sent on its way to processing for whey protein. It then
undergoes a variety of filtering steps to remove a good deal of the carbohydrate
(lactose) and fat and take the whey from being about 15 percent protein to 35
percent protein, then to 50 percent protein, and then to 80 percent protein
concentrate. These are all considered whey protein concentrates; the 80 percent
protein is the one most commonly used in protein powders using whey protein
concentrate. The gentle filtration process that produces whey protein concentrate
leaves the whey protein microfractions in place. These include beta-
lactoglobulin (~50-55%), alpha-lactalbumin (~20-25%), glycomacropeptide
(~10-15%), immunoglobulins (~10-15%), serum albumin (~5-10%), lactoferrin
(~1%), lactoperoxidase (<1%), and other minor proteins such as beta-
microglobulin, lysozyme, insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), and gamma-
globulins, which provide the major benefits of whey, such as antioxidant and
immune-boosting benefits, as well as enhance muscle growth and strength.

To further purify the whey protein and create a whey protein isolate that is
greater than 90 percent protein, the 80 percent whey protein concentrate
undergoes a further process, often involving microfiltration or ion exchange
chromatography to remove more of the carbohydrate and fat. Depending on the
processing involved, creating an isolate sometimes damages the microfractions
of whey. So there can be a cost of a purer whey protein powder. This is the
reason my whey protein isolate undergoes microfiltration and ultrafiltration,
which preserves the important whey microfractions, is sought after. Some whey
protein also undergoes the process of hydrolysis. This essentially breaks the long
whey protein chains into much shorter chains, or peptides; some are just two or
three amino acids in length. These hydrolyzed whey proteins are even quicker to
digest than whey isolate. The whey protein concentrate, isolate, or hydrolysate is
then spray-dried to form a powder. The powder is often instantized so that it
mixes better in fluids and does not clump.

Whey is definitely the king of the protein powders. This is due to several factors.
The first is that it is rich in the branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), which are
the most critical for muscle growth, as well as energy. For more on BCAAs, read
goal 8 later in this chapter. No other protein is as fast as whey protein, meaning
that it gets its amino acids into the bloodstream quite rapidly. Whey delivers the
majority of its amino acids to the bloodstream in about 60 to 90 minutes (figure
27.1; Boirie 1997). This allows it to rapidly turn on muscle protein synthesis for
instigating muscle growth. This is important around workouts to enhance
recovery and aid muscle growth while the muscle is primed for it. Whey protein
also provides special peptides and microfractions that other protein sources or
straight-up amino acids don’t. These peptides and microfractions provide
numerous benefits to health, performance, and physique. For example, some
peptides relax the blood vessels to cause vasodilation. Not only does this provide
cardiovascular health benefits, but it helps to deliver whey’s amino acids to the
muscles in a more efficient manner. A study comparing whey protein to an
amino acid mix that provided the same amino acids that whey provides showed
that whey protein increased muscle protein synthesis better than the amino acids
(Kanda et al. 2013).
  Figure 27.1 Plasma leucine concentrations after ingestion of whey or casein.




  Reprinted, by permission, from Y. Boirie, M. Dangin, P. Gashon, et al., 1997, “Slow and fast dietary
 proteins differently modulate postprandial protein accretion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences of the United States of America 94(26):14930-14935. Copyright (1997) National Academy of
                                            Sciences, U.S.A.

Yet as good as whey is at rapidly spiking muscle protein synthesis, by itself, it
may offer too transient a boost in protein synthesis. Combining casein protein
(which is very slow digesting) with whey prolongs the length of time that muscle
protein is spiked and leads to better long-term gains in muscle growth and
strength, as compared to whey protein alone (Soop et al. 2012; Reidy et al.
2014; Reidy et al. 2013; Kerksick 2006).

Anytime you have a protein shake, you should consider having whey and some
form of casein. Your best bet is a form of casein that provides micellar casein,
the natural form of casein in milk, which digests the slowest. You can do this by
buying a separate jug of whey protein and a separate jug of casein protein and
mixing them at about 1:1 ratio. Or you can go for the more convenient method of
buying a protein powder blend that already combines whey and casein. An even
easier method is to mix whey protein in about 2 cups of low-fat milk or 1 cup of
Greek yogurt. Both milk and Greek yogurt are good sources of micellar casein
and can make the protein powder much tastier than mixing it in water.

The most critical times to take this protein blend are within 30 minutes before
workouts and within 30 minutes after workouts. Shoot for about 20 to 40 grams
of protein at each dose.

Another crucial time to take a mixed protein powder is as soon as you wake up
in the morning. Because you have been fasting while you sleep, your muscle
protein has been broken down for fuel. By drinking a mixed protein shake of
whey and casein, you rebuild the broken-down protein and put your body back
in an anabolic state.
You should also have a mixed protein powder containing whey and casein
immediately before bed. Micellar casein can take up to 7 hours to fully digest.
This is because casein literally forms a clot when it is in the stomach. To
visualize this, consider when you mix a whey protein powder compared to when
you mix a casein protein powder. The whey tends to mix very easily yet the
casein tends to form clumps in the fluid. This is similar to what happens in your
stomach when you consume casein. Although the clumps of casein may be bad
for palatability when drinking a casein shake, it provides benefits when these
clumps form in your stomach. These clumps decrease the surface area of the
casein that is available to digestive enzymes. The enzymes must digest the
casein clumps one layer at a time, much like peeling the layers of an onion. This
means that casein provides a slow and steady supply of amino acids for most of
the night. That can help to prevent the breakdown of muscle protein while you
sleep, helping you to gain more muscle mass in the long run.


 Goal 7: Use Different Types of Carbohydrate
          Before and After Workouts
It should be obvious that before a workout you want to provide your body ample
fuel to keep your muscles running as strong as possible for as long as possible
throughout the workout. Having a protein shake, as discussed earlier, will help
with those energy needs, as will the supplements discussed in goal 8. However,
during your workouts one of the major fuel sources that your muscles use is
glycogen. Glycogen is the storage form of carbohydrate. In simplified terms,
when you consume carbohydrate, most is broken down into or converted into
glucose, which is what blood sugar is. Glucose can either be used fairly
immediately for fuel or it can be stored, mainly in muscle fibers and the liver. It
is stored in the form of glycogen, which is just long branched chains of glucose
connected together. The glycogen in your muscle cells and liver is broken down
into glucose and used as one of the main fuels for your workouts.

Given all of this, you want to make sure that before workouts you provide your
body a readily available source of glucose that will also last long into the
workout. The best source of such a carb is a low-glycemic carb. Fruit works well
because it is a low-glycemic carb and because most fruit is about half glucose
and half fructose. Low glycemic means that it doesn’t spike blood glucose levels,
which then spikes insulin levels. Because when insulin levels are spiked, it
rushes all of the glucose into the muscle cells and depletes the levels of glucose
in the blood, which puts you in a state of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). That
leaves you lethargic, fatigued, slow, and weak. So when you consume fruit
before a workout, the glucose component of fruit will give your body a small
source of quick energy that it can use. But the fructose, on the other hand, is low
glycemic despite being a sugar. This is because the body can’t readily use the
form of sugar that fructose is. So it has to go to the liver, where it gets converted
to glycogen. Then the liver controls when the glycogen is released into the
bloodstream as glucose. This allows fructose to provide longer-lasting energy. So
with fruit you get a small dose of quick energy, but also longer lasting energy to
prevent you from crashing. Within 30 minutes before workouts consume about
20 to 40 grams of carbohydrate from fruit or other low-glycemic carb source
along with a protein shake.

After the workout, your best bet is to do the opposite of before the workout and
consume a high-glycemic carb. At the end of a workout, your muscle glycogen
levels are depleted. If your muscle glycogen levels are not restored, your
performance in the next workout can suffer and muscle growth may be
compromised.

One way that muscle growth can be compromised is because muscle glycogen
levels serve as a barometer for how much energy the body has stored. If energy
levels are low, as it seems when muscle glycogen is low, then the muscles may
not want to expend energy-building muscle. Building muscle requires energy,
and bigger muscles require more energy to maintain. If your body is unsure that
you have adequate energy to fuel other, more critical processes and to maintain
more muscle mass, it may choose not to go gangbusters in building muscle.

Another way that muscle growth may be compromised by not consuming
adequate carbohydrate is because glycogen pulls water into the muscle fibers.
The more glycogen, the more water in the muscle fibers. More water makes the
muscles fuller. This makes your muscles appear significantly bigger. If your
muscles are low in glycogen, then they are also low in water and that means that
they look flatter and smaller than they could. Having muscles that are fuller due
to more glycogen and water can also instigate muscle growth. There is evidence
that having more water in the muscle fibers stretches the muscle membranes, and
that stretch instigates chemical pathways that increase muscle protein synthesis,
which can lead to greater muscle growth.
The best way to fully replenish muscle glycogen after workouts is with high-
glycemic (fast-digesting) carbohydrate. These types of carbohydrate make it into
the bloodstream and to your muscle fibers almost as quickly as you ingest them.
The quicker you get carbohydrate to your muscles after workouts, the faster and
better the muscle glycogen replenishment. One of the best sources of fast
carbohydrate is dextrose, which is glucose. This form of sugar requires no
digestion and is absorbed immediately into your bloodstream. You can use
straight dextrose or glucose powder or Pixy Stix (100% dextrose) or gummy
bears, which tend to be made out of dextrose and corn syrup. Corn syrup is
essentially branched glucose molecules that are immediately broken down and
absorbed. Corn syrup is completely different from high-fructose corn syrup.
White bread and white potatoes are also good sources because they are mainly
starch, which is branched glucose molecules bound together that break apart
rapidly upon ingestion.

These fast carbs also spike insulin levels. After a workout is the one of the rare
times of day when you want to spike the anabolic hormone insulin. Insulin is
critical for pushing creatine into muscle fibers. Without a big spike in insulin,
creatine uptake is not optimal. Insulin also helps amino acids, such as beta-
alanine and BCAAs; the other critical ones from your protein shake get taken up
by the muscle fibers. And let’s not forget about the glucose from fast
carbohydrate, which insulin helps to gain entry into the muscle fibers. For more
information on these supplements, see goal 8.

Having fast carbohydrate after workouts is a sweet treat that doesn’t damage
your diet. Whether you are trying to maximize gains in mass or lose fat and gain
muscle, you should be following a fairly “clean” diet. That is, doughnuts, French
fries, and ice cream should not be staples in your nutrition plan. Having a dose
of sweets in the form of dextrose, gummy bears, Pixy Stix, or white bread with
jelly is a great way to get your sweet fix in for the day and actually have it
enhance your results. Why would you ever want to skip that?

Some research shows that consuming a protein shake after workouts with or
without fast carbs spikes muscle protein synthesis to an equivalent level. In other
words, adding carbohydrate to a protein shake postworkout does not increase
muscle protein synthesis any more than the protein shake did alone without
carbohydrate. This has caused some experts to claim that you do not need
carbohydrate after workouts. Well, that’s a bit extreme. It’s true that you can still
build muscle without having carbohydrate after workouts. But I wouldn’t
recommend that unless you are on a very low-carb diet and you have removed
carbohydrate from every other meal of your diet. In fact, it makes no sense to eat
carbohydrate at other meals but avoid eating carbohydrate postworkout. If you
are eating carbohydrate at any meals, the most critical meal to eat it is the
postworkout meal when it will aid in recovery.

Some people worry that eating carbohydrate postworkout will blunt growth
hormone and testosterone levels after the workout. Here’s what they don’t
understand. Growth hormone and testosterone levels rise during the workout and
peak toward the end of the workout, depending on the workout. After the
workout, the levels of theses hormones begin to drop sharply so that they are
back to resting levels about 60 to 90 minutes after the workout is over. The
release of these hormones has already peaked before you consume the
carbohydrate. After the workout it is too late for the carbohydrate to have a
negative effect on hormone levels.

Some people worry that consuming fast carbohydrate after workouts will lead to
diabetes. This is due to the media’s demonization of all sugar. Yes, if you are
eating sugar while sitting around all day, it will increase your risk of developing
type 2 diabetes. But someone who trains regularly is already preventing the
metabolic damage that leads to type 2 diabetes. And right after a workout is
when the carbohydrate goes straight to the muscles and restocks the muscle
glycogen as well as the liver glycogen levels. So there is no risk in consuming
fast carbohydrate after workouts. It’s what your body needs.

Although the amount of fast carbohydrate you consume after a workout depends
on your weight and the intensity and length of the workout, a general
recommendation is to shoot for about 20 to 40 grams of fast carbs such as
dextrose within 30 minutes after the workout is over. Limit the fast carbs to
about 60 grams for two main reasons. The first is that for optimal absorption by
the intestines, 60 to 70 grams of one type of carbohydrate is the maximum
before absorption by the intestines becomes limited. If you’re consuming more
than this, add some fructose, such as from fruit, to your postworkout meal in
addition to the dextrose or glucose. The second reason is that consuming too
much fast carbohydrate can make you feel terrible after it’s all been quickly
taken up by the liver and muscles and your blood glucose levels drop. This is
known as hypoglycemia and can make you feel dizzy, lethargic, and just lousy in
general. If you find that this happens to you even with smaller amounts of fast
carbohydrate, then mix your postworkout carbohydrate so that you are getting
some fast and some slow carbohydrate, such as fruit, oats, whole-wheat bread,
and sweet potatoes.


       Goal 8: Supplement Before and After
                    Workouts
The two most critical windows for supplying your body the nutrients it needs to
grow bigger and stronger is the preworkout window and the postworkout
window. Getting the right nutrients right before you work out can have a
significant impact on your muscle strength, energy levels, muscle endurance, and
overall intensity of your training. Plus it will prime your body for muscle growth
when the workout is over.

Taking in the proper nutrients immediately after the workout will help to better
replenish what was used up during the workout, aid recovery, and allow for
better muscle growth and strength gains.

In addition to protein powder blend and carbohydrate before and after workouts,
the three critical supplements that you should consider taking before and after
workouts are BCAAs, creatine, and beta-alanine. Along with the protein and
carbohydrate, these can have a dramatic impact on muscle growth and strength
gains. In fact, research from Victoria University (Australia) found that when
participants consumed whey protein, creatine, and glucose immediately before
and after workouts for 10 weeks they had an 80 percent greater increase in
muscle mass and about a 30 percent greater increase in muscle strength than
participants taking the same supplements in the morning and at night (Cribb and
Hayes 2006). They also lost body fat while taking the supplements pre-and
postworkout, while the group taking the supplements in the morning and night
lost no body fat. The pre-and postworkout supplement group also had
significantly higher muscle glycogen levels, which is critical for performance
and muscle growth.
branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs)—The BCAAs are the three amino acids
   leucine, isoleucine, and valine. These amino acids are critical to take before
   and after workouts because of their ability to boost energy, reduce fatigue, and
   instigate muscle growth.

Supplementing with BCAAs before exercise promotes muscle endurance and
blunts fatigue. One reason for this is the fact that the BCAAs, unlike most other
amino acids, are used directly by the muscle fibers as an energy source. This is
especially true during intense exercise, such as weight training.

Another way the BCAAs keep you energized during workouts is thanks to
valine. During exercise tryptophan is taken up by the brain in large amounts.
Tryptophan is converted in the brain to 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), or what
you likely know better as serotonin. Having higher serotonin during exercise
signals the brain that the body is fatigued. This leads to a reduction in muscle
strength and endurance. Valine competes with tryptophan for entry into the brain
and typically wins. This means that less tryptophan gets in and gets converted to
serotonin, which allows your muscles to contract with more force for a longer
time before getting fatigued. This also can help you to stay more alert and keep
your brain sharper during the day when you are not exercising.

After workouts you want another dose of BCAAs because they are the most
critical amino acids for muscle growth. Leucine is the key player here; it has one
of the most critical roles in muscle growth. Leucine acts much like a key does to
an ignition of a car. The car in this case is a muscle cell or fiber. The ignition
turns on the process of muscle protein synthesis, which builds up the muscle
protein that leads to muscle growth. In more scientific terms, leucine activates a
complex called mTOR, which ramps up muscle protein synthesis and therefore
muscle growth. Those who add extra leucine to postworkout protein and
carbohydrate have significantly greater muscle protein synthesis than those just
getting protein and carbohydrate.

Another way that leucine acts as a potent anabolic agent is by spiking insulin
levels. Much like eating high-glycemic carbs, leucine increases the release of
insulin from the pancreas, which helps to drive it into the muscle cells where it
can work to stimulate muscle growth. Insulin also encourages muscles’ growth
itself by encouraging greater muscle protein synthesis and decreasing muscle
protein breakdown.

Take a 5-to 10-gram dose of BCAAs within 30 minutes before workouts and
another 5 to 10 grams of BCAAs within 30 minutes after workouts. Even though
whey protein, which you will also take at these points, is rich in BCAAs, taking
extra BCAAs in their free form can get them to your muscles faster and ensure
that you have ample BCAAs at the time they are most critical.
creatine—Both clinical data and anecdotal evidence suggest that creatine
  provides the best results when taken before and after workouts. The main
  reason to get a dose of creatine before workouts is that it provides the muscle
  fibers with a powerful energy source. Once inside the muscle fibers, creatine
  gains a high-energy phosphate to form phosphocreatine (PCr).
  Phosphocreatine is simply a molecule of creatine with a phosphate group
  attached to it. During very high-intensity exercise, such as weightlifting,
  creatine donates this high-energy phosphate group to the muscle to form ATP
  (adenosine triphosphate). This rapidly generated ATP fuels the muscle
  contractions during a set. The more phosphocreatine you have stored in your
  muscle fibers, the more reps you can get during a set. This is the main way
  that supplementing with creatine leads to greater gains in muscle strength and
  muscle hypertrophy over time. It allows you to complete more reps with a
  given weight. That eventually allows you to lift heavier and heavier weight.
  And that greater overload placed on the muscle in combination with greater
  work performed eventually leads to greater muscle growth. Getting a dose of
  creatine before workouts ensures that your levels of phosphocreatine in the
  muscle fibers are maximized.

Supplementing with creatine leads to significant gains in muscle strength and
power as well as muscle growth. Numerous studies have reported significant
improvements in one-rep max strength of people taking creatine. For example,
Vandenberghe and colleagues (1997) reported that untrained participants taking
creatine while following a 10-week weight training program increased their one-
rep max on the squat by 25 percent more than those taking a placebo while
following the same program. Another study by Noonan and colleagues (1998)
found that trained collegiate football players taking creatine while following an
8-week weight training program had a 6 percent increase in their one-rep bench
press strength, while those taking a placebo had no strength gains at all. A 2003
review by Rawson and Volek on creatine reported that out of 16 studies
investigating the effects of creatine on one-rep max strength, the average
increase in strength was about 10 percent more in those taking creatine than in
those taking a placebo.

Studies also show that creatine enables people to complete more reps with a
given weight. Competitive powerlifters taking creatine while preparing for a
competition increased the number of reps they were able to complete with 85
percent of their one-rep max by 40 percent, while those taking a placebo had no
change in the number of reps they were able to complete with the same weight
(Kelly and Jenkins, 1998). Rawson and Volek (2003) determined that out of the
16 studies they reviewed, the average increase in reps performed while taking
creatine was about 15 percent more than for those taking a placebo. Figure 27.2
shows the average percent increase in muscle strength and repetitions completed
when participants supplemented with creatine as compared to a placebo.
        Figure 27.2 Percent increase in strength and reps completed when
                 supplementing with creatine versus a placebo.




Source: E.S. Rawson and J.S. Volek, 2003, “Effects of creatine supplementation and resistance training on
muscle strength and weightlifting performance,” Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research 17(4): 822-
                                                  831.

Most of the studies performed on creatine indicate that supplementing with it
significantly enhances athletic ability because it produces higher muscle force
and power during short bouts of exercise. The participants in these studies had
mixed athletic ability and training status, from relatively untrained novices to
competitive college-level athletes. Some of the exercise performances that are
improved include various types of short-term and all-out cycling, sprinting,
repeated jumping, swimming, soccer, kayaking, rowing, and of course
weightlifting, which was discussed previously. The greatest improvements in
athletic performance seem to be found during a series of repetitive high-power
output exercise bouts. For example, after a short rest period (20-60 seconds)
after a short sprint, speed may be increased on the second bout of sprinting.
Athletic performance during these latter bouts of exercise can be increased by 5
to 20 percent with creatine over the placebo group. This means that athletes in
sports such as football and soccer, in which continuous play typically lasts for
only a few seconds, can expect a significant boost in performance from creatine.

Several studies show that creatine significantly boosts lean muscle mass. Kelly
and Jenkins (1998), as noted earlier, found that the powerlifters taking creatine
gained an average of over 6 pounds of lean body weight; some participants
gained up to 11 pounds of lean body weight in less than 4 weeks, while those
taking a placebo had no change in body weight. Becque and colleagues (2000)
reported that trained weightlifters taking creatine gained almost 5 pounds of lean
body weight in 6 weeks, while those taking a placebo had no change in body
weight. Since creatine supplementation likely does not increase bone mass or
organ mass, the increase in lean body weight is more reasonably the result of a
gain in muscle mass. In these short periods a good deal of that gain in muscle
mass likely comes from water, because the muscle fibers gain a higher volume of
fluid when stocked with higher levels of creatine. However, that can lead to
long-term muscle growth via greater protein synthesis. Figure 27.3 shows the
average increase in lean body weight (muscle mass) in pounds that participants
gained while taking creatine and following a weight training program. Both
studies found no change in lean body weight in those taking a placebo.
  Figure 27.3 Increase in lean body mass (in pounds) while taking creatine and
                    participating in weight training program.




 Sources: V.G. Kelly and D. G. Jenkins, 1998, “Effect of oral creatine supplementation on near-maximal
  strength and repeated sets of high-intensity bench press exercise,” Journal of Strength & Conditioning
  Research 12(2): 109-115, and M.D. Becque, J.D. Lochmann, and D.R. Melrose, 2000, “Effects of oral
 creatine supplementation on muscular strength and body composition,” Medicine & Science in Sports &
                                         Exercise 32(3): 654-658.

The majority of benefits from creatine involve its ability to supply fast energy
during workouts. This allows you to recover faster between bouts of exercise,
such as fast running or weightlifting. But today we know that creatine works
through a number of mechanisms, one of which is through muscle cell
volumization. This is a fancy term that means the muscle cells fill up with water.
Since creatine is essentially a protein, it draws water from the blood and the
space outside of the muscle cells (known as the interstitial fluid) into the muscle
through the process of osmosis. This is the major reason for the rapid weight
gain that is associated with creatine supplementation in the early stages of
supplementation. However, this increase in cell volume causes the cell
membranes to stretch, which is thought to initiate long-term increases in muscle
growth and strength through greater protein synthesis—the method that muscle
cells use to grow.

Another way that creatine has been found to work is by increasing the number of
satellite cells in muscle fibers. Satellite cells are basically muscle stem cells, and
one way that muscles grow bigger and stronger is by the addition of muscle
satellite cells to existing muscle fibers. A 2006 study by Olsen and colleagues
found that after 8 weeks of supplementing with creatine while following a
weight training program, participants had almost 100 percent more satellite cells
in their muscle fibers than those taking a placebo. As expected, the greater
number of satellite cells was associated with greater muscle size. This can also
lead to greater muscle strength and power.

Creatine also appears to work through increases in insulin-like growth factor-I
(IGF-I). IGF-I is critical in initiating processes in muscle cells that lead to
enhanced muscle growth and muscle strength. Burke (2008) reported that
weight-trained participants taking creatine while following a weightlifting
program for 8 weeks had significantly higher IGF-I content in their muscle fibers
than those taking a placebo.

Another way that creatine appears to work is by inhibiting myostatin.
Participants taking creatine while following a weightlifting program for 8 weeks
had significantly lower myostatin levels than those taking a placebo (Saremi et
al. 2010). Myostatin is a protein that limits muscle growth. The Iranian
researchers concluded that since myostatin levels were lower in the participants
taking creatine, one way that creatine may work to increase muscle size and
strength is by reducing myostatin levels, which reduces the limitation that this
protein places on muscle growth.

Although there is ample research showing that creatine is safe for almost anyone
at any age to use, there are still myths regarding safety and side effects. One of
the longest-standing myths is that creatine can cause muscle cramps. Numerous
studies debunk this claim. Greenwood and colleagues (2003b) concluded that
NCAA football players taking creatine over the course of 3 years had no increase
in incidence of muscle cramps or muscle injures. In fact, another 2003 study
found that NCAA football players taking creatine for one full season actually
had a significant reduction in muscle cramps and muscle injuries (Greenwood et
al. 2003a).

Another misconception about creatine is that it can lead to impaired liver and
kidney function. Studies done in the 1990s were some of the first to show that
short-term creatine supplementation does not impair kidney function in healthy
adults (Poortmans et al. 1997; Poortmans and Francaux 1999). Another study
(Cancela et al. 2008) has further shown that 8 weeks of creatine supplementation
in football (soccer) athletes had no effect on health markers that included kidney
and liver function. Longer-term studies have also been done to confirm
creatine’s safety. Mayhew and colleagues (2002) concluded that NCAA football
players taking creatine for up to about 6 years had no long-term detrimental
effects on overall health or kidney or liver functions. In another study (Kreider et
al. 2003) NCAA football players taking creatine for close to 2 years exhibited no
negative effects on general health or kidney and liver function. The most recent
study (Lugaresi et al. 2013) involved weight-trained participants who were
following a high-protein diet (0.6-1.5 grams of protein per pound of body
weight) and consumed 5 grams of creatine for 1 year. Kidney function was not
compromised.

Instead of being detrimental to your health, creatine actually provides numerous
health benefits. Because phosphocreatine is important for energy production
involved in nerve cell function, creatine has been shown to provide numerous
benefits to the brain and the rest of the nervous system. For example, research
has found that creatine supplementation enhances cognitive function and
memory and may help in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s
disease, and even depression. It may also protect against brain injury.

Creatine has also been found to aid cardiovascular health, such as improvement
of symptoms in those with congestive heart failure, and may even lower
cholesterol levels. One study (Earnest et al. 1996) discovered that male and
female participants taking creatine for 8 weeks had a drop of more than 5 percent
in total cholesterol and a drop in LDL cholesterol (the bad type of cholesterol) of
more than 20 percent. Similarly, researchers reported that 28 days of creatine
supplementation decreased total cholesterol by 10 percent in healthy young
males (Arciero et al. 2001). And healthy young males taking creatine plus a
multivitamin supplement significantly reduced their levels of homocysteine (an
amino acid associated with heart disease), compared to those taking just the
multivitamin supplement (Korzun 2004).

So be sure to get a dose of creatine before workouts to ensure that your levels of
it in the muscle cells are maximized. And get another dose after workouts, when
it will be preferentially taken up by the muscle cells, and replenish any that was
lost during the workout. How much you take pre-and postworkout depends on
the form of creatine you use. If you go with creatine monohydrate, take 3 to 5
grams before and after workouts. Although creatine monohydrate is the most
studied form of creatine, creatine hydrochloride is a form of creatine that I have
worked with extensively. It tends to be absorbed better than creatine
monohydrate and causes less stomach distress. If using this form, take 1.5 to 2
grams before and after workouts.
beta-alanine—A nonessential amino acid that is produced naturally in the liver.
    You also get it in your diet from meat sources, such as beef and poultry. In the
    body, beta-alanine, whether from the liver or ingested from food or
  supplements, is taken up by the muscle fibers and combines with the amino
  acid histidine to form the dipeptide (two-amino-acid protein) carnosine.
  Carnosine provides all the benefits associated with beta-alanine, which
  include greater strength and power, better endurance, and even greater fat loss
  and muscle growth.

Carnosine works by increasing the muscle’s buffering capacity of hydrogen (H+)
ions, which are produced when lactic acid levels rise during intense exercises,
such as weight training. This increases the muscle’s ability to maintain stronger
contractions for longer periods during exercise. In other words, you can lift more
weight and complete more reps during the later stages of your workouts. And
this ability leads to greater gains in strength and power, as well as muscle mass,
while also promoting greater fat loss.

Participants taking just over 4 grams of beta-alanine per day for 30 days were
able to increase the number of reps they could complete during a squat workout
by almost 25 percent more than those taking a placebo (Hoffman et al. 2008).
Another study found that 4 weeks of beta-alanine supplementation in amateur
boxers increased their average punching power in the last 10 seconds of
simulated 3-minute rounds by 2000 percent more than those taking a placebo
(Donovan et al. 2012). The ability to maintain punching power late in the round
is similar to the ability to maintain more strength and power later in workouts,
meaning you can lift more weight for more reps. The most recent study, found
that soldiers taking beta-alanine for four weeks increased jumping power and
even marksmanship. This suggests not only a muscle performance benefit of
beta-alanine, but also possible improved psychomotor performance (Hoffman et
al. 2014).

Research also shows a great synergy of beta-alanine with creatine. One study
reported that weight-trained athletes consuming 3.2 grams of beta-alanine plus
10 grams of creatine daily for 12 weeks gained significantly more muscle mass
while simultaneously losing significant body fat, as compared to those taking
just 10 grams of creatine alone and those taking a placebo (Hoffman et al. 2006).
Both the creatine-only group and the placebo group did not lose any body fat.

The absolute lowest amount of beta-alanine consumed to provide the benefits
listed previously is 1.6 grams per day. However, research on various levels of
supplementation shows that around 2 grams per day or 4 grams per day each
may provide even better benefits. Since the uptake of nutrients such as amino
acids beta-alanine is improved around workouts, I recommend getting a dose of
beta-alanine preworkout and postworkout. Blood levels of beta-alanine peak
within 30 minutes of supplementing with it, and it completely leaves the
circulation within 3 hours of consuming. So it makes sense to get about a 2-gram
dose of beta-alanine both before workouts and then immediately after.


    Goal 9: Cover Your Vitamin and Mineral
           Needs With a Supplement
Athletes and those who train intensely lose many critical vitamins and minerals,
such as B vitamins, vitamin C, chromium, selenium, zinc, magnesium, and
copper. This is due to a variety of factors, such as loss of the minerals in sweat
and urine, as well as increased use for energy production during the workout and
recovery and protein synthesis after training.

Even if you were careful to eat a well-rounded diet, you may not be getting
adequate amounts of critical micronutrients. That’s because our food supply
today is lower in many of these vitamins and minerals due to conventional
farming practices, such as overfarming, which dwindles the nutrient density of
the soil. And the grain feeding of conventional cattle and chickens also dwindles
the micronutrient content of milk, beef, eggs, and chicken. Plus certain foods
inhibit the absorption of some micronutrients. Refined sugar, as well as white-
flour products (like white bread), can lower blood levels of minerals, such as
zinc and magnesium. Foods rich in calcium (such as dairy products) inhibit
absorption of both zinc and magnesium by the small intestine. Foods rich in
phytates (phosphorous compounds found in whole-grain breads, cereals, and
legumes) also hinder the absorption of zinc by the small intestine.

Numerous studies also show that vitamin and mineral supplements reduce the
risk of certain diseases and death. The most recent was from Li and colleagues
(2012). The researchers reported that in about 24,000 people, those taking
vitamin and mineral supplements at the start of the study had a 42 percent
reduced risk of all-cause mortality over the 11 years of the study and a 48
percent reduced risk of cancer-related death. A 2012 study by Arul and
colleagues suggests that supplementing with a multivitamin could reduce the risk
of colon cancer. A study reported that supplementing with multivitamins,
especially those including vitamins A, C, and E, reduced the risk of colon cancer
(Park et al. 2010). Another study reported that women using multivitamins had a
30 percent reduced risk of heart attack (Rautiainen et al. 2010). A 2009 study by
Pocobelli and colleagues suggests that multivitamin use over 10 years reduces
the risk of death from cardiovascular disease by 16 percent, while vitamin E
supplementation specifically can reduce the risk by almost 30 percent. Xu and
colleagues (2009) reported that women taking a multivitamin supplement have a
younger biological age based on telomere length compared to those not
supplementing. And a study reported that taking selenium along with a
multivitamin reduced the risk of prostate cancer by 40 percent (Peters et al.
2007). A study found that in 130 adults, those taking a multivitamin and mineral
supplement for 1 year had significantly less infection, such as respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and urinary tract infections and influenza, and a lower rate of
illness-related absenteeism, than those receiving a placebo (Barringer et al.
2003).

The bottom line is that you definitely should be using a multivitamin and
mineral supplement to boost overall health, brain function, athletic performance,
and even fat loss and muscle recovery and growth. Your best bet is to take your
multivitamin with your first meal of the day to enhance absorption of most of the
nutrients and to stock up on them for your day ahead.

Look for a multivitamin that provides as close to 100 percent as possible of the
daily value (DV) of the following:

     Vitamin A (only if it is mostly beta-carotene; otherwise keep it under 4000
     IU)
     Vitamins B1 (thiamin), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (niacin), B6, B12, and folic acid
     (B9)
     Vitamin C
     Chromium
     Copper
     Iodine (especially if you follow a low-sodium diet)
     Iron
     Manganese
     Selenium

Don’t worry about the amount of calcium in your multivitamin. In fact, because
calcium interferes with the absorption of other minerals such as zinc and
magnesium, the less calcium the better. You should take a calcium supplement
separate from when you take a multivitamin. Don’t worry too much about the
amount of zinc or magnesium since you should take them separately from a
multivitamin anyway.

Consider getting more than the DV, or likely what’s in your multivitamin, of the
following vitamins and minerals:

     B vitamins: These water-soluble vitamins are typically low in those who
     train. They are often lost in sweat. Take a B-complex 100 that provides 100
     milligrams of B1, B2, B3, pantothenic acid (B5), and B6 and at least 100
     micrograms of B12, 400 micrograms of folic acid, and 300 micrograms of
     biotin once or twice a day.
     Vitamin C: This is also a water-soluble vitamin that can be lost in sweat.
     Take 250 to 500 milligrams of vitamin C once a day.
     Vitamin D: This vitamin is critical for your health, physique, and
     performance. It aids fat loss, testosterone levels, bone health, and mood.
     Take 2000 to 6000 IU of vitamin D3 per day.
     Vitamin E: New research shows that vitamin E is critical for muscle
     recovery. Unless your multivitamin has at least 400 IU of E, you will want
     to take a vitamin E supplement providing 400 to 800 IU per day. Be sure to
     buy the natural forms, called d-alpha-tocopherols, which are absorbed and
     used better than the synthetic forms, called dl-alpha tocopherols.
     Calcium: Important for bone health, fat loss, and even testosterone levels,
     calcium in the amount of 1000 to 2000 milligrams per day is required. Take
     500 to 600 milligrams of calcium (any more may not get absorbed properly)
     one or two times per day (depending on how much calcium you get from
     your diet) separately from other minerals and vitamins.
     Zinc and magnesium: Get 30 milligrams of zinc and 450 milligrams of
     magnesium 30 to 60 minutes before bedtime. It will help increase sleep
     quality and keep your testosterone levels and muscle strength up. An easy
     way to do this is to take a ZMA supplement.
     For any vitamin or mineral that does not add up to 100% DV in your
     multivitamin, consider taking as a separate supplement to keep your bases
     covered, unless you are certain to get adequate amounts of the nutrient in
     your daily diet.


         Goal 10: Find What Works for You
The first nine rules work very well for most people. However, maybe you are
that one person who doesn’t respond so well to a few of these goals. Maybe your
schedule doesn’t allow for frequent meals. Maybe you’re a vegan, and dairy-
based protein powders are not on your diet. Whatever it is, use these goals as a
guideline, but stick only with the ones that work for you. Take these goals and
adapt them to your schedule and your body, or find ones that work better for
you, or create your own. You have a unique biochemistry, and not everyone
reacts the same way to food or training. Be your own guinea pig. If something
works for you, it doesn’t matter whether or not it works for anyone else.


                         Sample Meal Plans
The following meal plans are based on the guidelines discussed previously. I
have provided one sample day for those who train at any of the four times of
day:

 1.   First thing in the morning (see table 27.1)
 2.   At lunch time (see table 27.2)
 3.   Before dinner (see table 27.3)
 4.   After dinner later at night (see table 27.4)

These are the four most common workout windows of the day. The following
meals are samples to be followed on workout days and provide roughly 3,300
calories, 290 grams of protein, 330 grams of carbohydrate, and 90 grams of fat.
For a 180-pound person, that equates to about 18 calories, a little over 1.5 grams
of protein, almost 2 grams of carbohydrate, and 0.5 gram of fat per pound. On
rest days, skip the postworkout meal and supplements and have the preworkout
meal as a snack that day. Take the suggested preworkout supplements with
breakfast on rest days. That means a reduction to about 3,000 calories, 260
grams of protein, 290 grams of carbohydrate, and 85 grams of fat. For a 180-
pounder, that equates to about 17 calories, a bit under 1.5 grams of protein, a bit
over 1.6 grams of carbohydrate, and just under 0.5 gram of fat per pound. These
sample diets will work well as a starting point for those weighing 160 to 200
pounds. If you weigh significantly less or more than this range, modify the
macronutrients and calories for your body weight.
               Chapter 28
   Nutrition for Maximizing Fat Loss
Before you read this chapter you should read chapter 27. The guidelines
discussed in chapter 27 are the same guidelines you want to follow to maximize
fat loss. After all, when you talk about dropping body fat, you still want to at
least maintain, if not build, lean muscle mass and muscle strength. And using the
programs in chapter 13 along with the information in chapter 27 and 28, you can.

While chapter 27 broke down the nutrition guidelines into goals, chapter 28
breaks down the nutrition information to maximize fat loss into steps. That’s
because fat loss is a continual process, and your diet must change gradually over
time. The worst thing that you can do is to immediately jump down to a very
low-calorie and low-carbohydrate diet. For example, many people ask me if
going on a keto diet where almost all carbohydrate is removed from the diet is a
smart plan. The answer is no. Yes, it can result in very rapid fat loss at the
beginning of the diet. But after a couple of months or less, when the fat loss
stops and they hit a plateau, they have little wiggle room to remove more
calories from their diet and continue losing body fat.

When you diet, your body responds by going into starvation mode. That
basically means that your body slows down your metabolic rate, which is the
number of calories you burn just sitting around. The reason for this is to
conserve energy stores, namely your body fat. Your body prefers to not be lean,
since body fat is stored energy that it can rely on in times of food scarcity. In
developed countries, food scarcity is obviously not a real threat for most people.
But your body has developed this process should there be a time when food is
scarce. So once you reduce your caloric intake, your body reacts by slowing
down your metabolic rate. The greater you reduce your caloric intake, the bigger
the drop in your metabolic rate and the quicker this will happen.

To prevent a massive slowing of your metabolic rate, you need to gradually
reduce your caloric intake little by little. Of course, exercise will help to keep
your metabolic rate higher, but it cannot prevent the gradual reduction of it as
you reduce calories. So you actually want to start a diet for fat loss by eating as
many calories as you can while still losing weight. This way you will have
ample room to keep reducing calories as your metabolic rate drops and fat loss
hits a plateau. This way you can keep losing body fat. Figure out how many
calories to start your diet with by reading through step 1: analyze your diet.


                      Stepping Up Fat Loss
Following are the eight steps you want to follow to maximize fat loss while
building muscle and strength or, at the very least, maintaining muscle mass.


Step 1: Analyze Your Diet
To get the best estimate of where you should start for calories, you will need to
take an honest look at your current diet. I typically recommend recording
everything you eat for one full week. But if that seems daunting, do at least two
weekdays and one weekend day. If you have a scale, weigh food such as
chicken, beef, and fish. For liquids and grains like rice and cereal, use measuring
cups and measuring spoons. Or if you have a good take on how much one cup of
something is, or how much 8 ounces of chicken breast is, then take your best
estimate. For packaged foods, use the nutrition facts label on the box; for other
foods, use a reliable source, such as USDA site. The direct link to their food
database is http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/search/list.

It’s important that you do not alter your typical diet when you record your food
intake. One trick that we use to keep people from steering astray from a diet is to
have them record everything they eat. When they have a weak moment and
crave doughnuts, knowing that they have to record that in a food log helps them
avoid eating the doughnuts. But during this week, do not avoid eating any of the
foods that you normally do. The point is to assess your true current diet so that
you know where to start your new diet. If you alter it, it can actually work
against your fat-loss efforts.

Calculate the amount of calories, grams of protein, grams of carbohydrate, and
grams of total fat for each food that you eat. Then add these up for all the foods
that you eat each day. Once you have the total amount of calories and grams of
protein, carbohydrate, and fat for each day, you need to get an average of all the
days. So if you recorded 7 days of food intake, then add the calories up for all 7
days and divide this number by 7 to get the average caloric intake for the 7 days.
If you did just 3 days, then obviously you would add up the total calories for the
3 days and divide by 3. Do this also for grams of protein, grams of carbohydrate,
and grams of fat. But the critical factor is your average caloric intake. Take your
average caloric intake and divide it by your body weight in pounds to calculate
your average calories relative to your body weight. For example, if you weigh
200 pounds and you consumed an average of 4,000 calories per day, you
currently consume an average of 20 calories per pound of body weight.

Step 2: Build Your Initial Diet
Using the muscle building guidelines in chapter 27, the most critical goals that
you want to focus on to build your initial diet are goal 1 (focus on protein) and
goal 2 (get ample fat). Start your diet by making sure that you consume 1.5
grams of protein per pound of body weight and 0.5 gram of fat per pound. Since
there are 4 calories per gram of protein, that means that you will consume 6
calories from protein per pound of body weight. Since fat has about 9 calories
per gram, you will be consuming 4.5 calories from fat per pound of body weight.
Adding the calories from protein and the calories from fat equates to 10.5
calories per pound of body weight. Subtract 10.5 calories from 20 calories (the
number of calories per pound of body weight you currently eat), which equals
9.5 calories. This is the number of calories you can consume from carbohydrate
per pound of body weight. Since there are 4 calories per gram of carbohydrate,
that equals about 2.5 grams. Round down to 2 grams of carbohydrate per pound
of body weight. So your new diet will consist of about 1.5 grams of protein, 2
grams of carbohydrate, 0.5 gram of fat, and 18.5 calories per pound of body
weight. For the 200-pounder, that equates to 3,700 calories, 300 grams of
protein, 400 grams of carbohydrate, and 100 grams of fat per day. See sample
diet for a 200-pound person following these guidelines in tables 28.1, 28.2, 28.3,
or 28.4 based on when you work out. Note that the sample meal plans in this
chapter are very similar for reasons of illustrating how to change the diet when
you move through the steps. This does not mean that you should eat the same
foods every day and the same foods in each step of the diet. Quite the contrary.
You want to have as much variety in your diet as possible. For food alternatives
to replace the foods in the sample diets, refer to the food alternatives list in
appendix B.

Follow this diet for as long as you continue losing fat. Note that you will likely
gain muscle mass even though you are dropping body fat. So do not use the scale
as your major indicator of fat loss. Use the mirror and waist size or the fit of the
waist on your pants. An even better option is to have your body fat
professionally measured by a seven-site skinfold caliper, underwater weighing,
or DEXA scan. Do not use bioelectrical impedance, which calculates percent
body fat on how fast it takes a current to travel through your body. That method
is not accurate.

The sample meals are for workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal
and have the preworkout meal as a snack.
Step 3: Adjust the Diet by Reducing Carbohydrate by
0.25 Gram per Pound
As mentioned previously, as you reduce calories, your body adjusts by lowering
metabolic rate, and your body burns fewer calories throughout the day. The only
way to combat this and continue losing body fat is to reduce your calories. Since
you want to keep protein and fat where they are to maximize muscle growth and
strength gains, your best bet is to whittle away at your carb intake. Each time
you hit a plateau in your diet and it seems like you have not made any progress
in losing fat for at least a week, it’s time to reduce carbohydrate. You will reduce
carbohydrate by 0.25 gram per pound of body weight each time you need to cut
again. That will reduce your total caloric intake by about 1 calorie per pound of
body weight. So for a 200-pound person, that equates to about a 200-calorie cut.

Because our sample 200-pounder is currently consuming 2 grams of
carbohydrate per pound of body weight, his first cut will be bring him down to
1.75 grams per pound of body weight. Where you start reducing your
carbohydrate depends on when you train. But regardless of when you train, you
will cut postworkout carbohydrate absolutely last. For those who train first thing
in the morning, start reducing carbohydrate from the end of the day and working
up as you continue to drop. For those who train at night, start reducing your
carbohydrate from the start of the day and work down as you continue to cut. It
gets a little trickier, if you train at lunch or before dinner. This will bounce
around from end to end a bit. See the sample diets for guidelines on dropping
carbohydrate from your diet with each 0.25-gram-per-pound cut.

You will progressively cut carbohydrate each time fat loss hits a plateau until
you are down to around just 0.25 gram of carbohydrate per pound. That is, if you
ever have to get that low. Many will not have to get anywhere close to that. But
it all depends on where you are starting from, how active your training is, and
how your body responds to the training and diet.

The following sample meals in tables 28.5 through 28.8 are for those making
their first cut in carbohydrate from 2.0 to 1.75 grams per pound of body weight
(or 350 grams of carbohydrate total for the 200-pounder). This drops calories to
17 per pound of body weight or about 3,400 for the 200-pound sample person.
Remember that these meal plans are based on workout days. On rest days, skip
the postworkout meal and have the preworkout meal as a snack.
You can find additional sample meals for the following cuts in carbohydrate in
appendix C:

    1.75 to 1.5 grams per pound of body weight
    1.5 to 1.25 grams per pound of body weight
    1.25 to 1 gram per pound of body weight
    1 to 0.75 gram per pound of body weight
    0.75 to 0.5 gram per pound of body weight

Step 4: Add a High-Carbohydrate Day
This step might be a favorite one for you because it gives you the opportunity to
eat some of the foods you might have been craving on a low-carbohydrate diet.
Once carbohydrate drops to 0.5 gram per pound of body weight, it is advisable to
include a higher-carbohydrate day every week or so. This can help to keep your
metabolic rate higher despite the fact that carbohydrate and caloric intake is so
low. Plus, it works well as an incentive to get through the week. Knowing that
you have a higher-carb day to look forward to helps you make it through the
low-carb period. Most people find that they better police themselves during the
low-carbohydrate days so that they can feel like they earned the high-carb day.
Once you have enjoyed the higher-carb day and enjoyed some of the food you
were craving, like bread and pasta, it’s easier to go back to the lower-
carbohydrate diet.

It doesn’t matter what day of the week your high-carbohydrate day is, but you
don’t want to go any less frequent than about every 7 days. A weekend day
works best for most people, but any day of the week will work. Protein and fat
should stay about the same; however, you can drop them somewhat on your
higher-carbohydrate day. But don’t allow protein to drop much lower than 1
gram per pound of body weight, and don’t allow fat to go any lower than 0.25
gram per pound. You should shoot for about 2 grams of carbohydrate per pound
of body weight on your high-carb day. That’s about 400 grams for the 200-
pounder.

Your best options for high-carbohydrate foods are low-glycemic or slow-
digesting carbohydrate, such as oatmeal, whole-wheat breads and pastas, and
sweet potatoes. However, if you train on your high-carb day, then you should
still consume high-glycemic carbohydrate immediately after the workout. While
the majority of your carbohydrate should come from low-GI carbohydrate, you
can enjoy some high-GI carbohydrate throughout the day. Having a boost in
insulin will help to keep your metabolism higher. And this will allow you to
enjoy some of the sweets you may have been craving.

When it comes to fruit, you should consume it just through the first half of the
day.

Foods on the high-carb days should not also be high-fat foods like doughnuts,
ice cream, or pizza. However, if you really have been craving one of these foods,
then feel free to have a reasonable portion to keep cravings at bay and stay on
your diet.

The following sample meals in tables 28.9 through 28.12 are for workout days.
On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and have the preworkout meal as a
snack.
Step 5: Cut Carbohydrate by 0.25 Gram One Final
Time
You can slash carbohydrate once more before you hit the lowest you can go in
carbohydrate. After all, you still need vegetables. And although they provide a
good deal of fiber, they also provide real net carbohydrate. Some experts
recommend not counting carbohydrate from vegetables as part of your daily total
of carbohydrate due to the high fiber content of most vegetables. Yet the
carbohydrate content of most vegetables is less than 50 percent fiber. So if
you’re eating a lot of vegetables, this can add up. Instead, I prefer to count even
fiber as part of daily carb intake, but realizing that at the lowest point, carb
intake will still be a good 30 to 60 grams depending on the diet, or roughly about
0.25 gram per pound of body weight. Small amounts of carbohydrate are also in
most protein shakes. And since you need to rely on it to maximize your results in
the gym, you’ll need to leave room for it in your diet. The bottom line is that at
the lowest point, you can never truly get to zero grams of carbohydrate.

Remember that during this phase of the diet, you should definitely include one
high-carbohydrate day each week as discussed in step 4. Having this high-carb
day to look forward to will make a difference in your ability to tolerate such
extremes in dieting.

You can find sample meals for making the final cut in carbohydrate from 0.5 to
0.25 gram per pound of body weight (or 50 grams of carbohydrate total for the
200-pounder) in appendix C. This drops calories to about 10 per pound of body
weight or about 2,000 for the 200-pound sample person. Protein and fat stay
steady as they have throughout. Remember that these meal plans are based on
workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and have the preworkout
meal as a snack.

Step 6: Switch to Intermittent Fasting (IF)
Once you get down to 0.25 gram of carbohydrate per pound of body weight, it’s
next to impossible to go any lower in carbohydrate. This small amount of
carbohydrate is coming from protein sources and vegetables. If you get this low
in carbohydrate and hit a plateau, then there is a very good chance that it is
because you are at extremely low levels of body fat but want to get even lower.
For men, this would be somewhere around 5 percent; for women it is somewhere
around 12 percent. To keep losing body fat, you could continue by dropping
protein and fat, but that could compromise muscle mass. So an alternative to try
first is intermittent fasting.

Intermittent fasting is a technique where you fast for a good portion of the day
and then you have a window of time where you can eat. The type of intermittent
fasting that I have found to work best for losing body fat and maintaining muscle
is 16/8 intermittent fasting. That means that you fast for 16 hours and your
feeding window is 8 hours. For the average person, the time of day you fast and
the time of day you eat make no difference. However, those who work out
should manipulate their fasting and feeding windows based on when they train.

If you train in the morning, then I suggest that you start your 8-hour feeding
window with your postworkout meal. That means that you would train
completely fasted and your first meal would be your postworkout shake. But
since you skipped your preworkout shake, your postworkout shake should
include both your pre-and postworkout shakes and supplements. For example, if
you train from 7:00 to 8:30 a.m., then your feeding window starts at 8:30 a.m.
with your postworkout shake and ends at 4:30 p.m. with your bedtime snack of
slow-digesting protein. If you train in the morning, yet ending your feeding
window in the late afternoon is too early for you, then you could postpone your
postworkout shake by 2 to 3 hours. It’s not ideal for maintaining muscle mass,
but it certainly will not hamper fat loss. The following sample meal plans in
tables 28.13 through 28.16 show you how to apply intermittent fasting for the
four main training times throughout the day. And while I suggest that you
schedule your fasting and eating around the time you train, you can also adjust
the time you train to better match when you want to fast and eat. If you normally
train in the morning but find that it’s almost impossible for you to fast at night
because your cravings are stronger at night, then train later in the day so that you
fast in the morning and eat at night.

Intermittent fasting has become increasingly popular in the last few years.
However, I have been interested in its application for fat loss for a couple of
decades. The lab where I did my postdoctoral at Yale University School of
Medicine did a bit of work on fasting and fat loss before 2000. Our group
published several papers showing that one of the key mechanisms in fasting-
induced fat loss has to do with an increase in the activity of genes that increase
the number of calories the body burns (Pilegaard et al. 2003; Hildebrandt et al.
2000). More specifically, when you fast, it turns on genes that encode for certain
uncoupling proteins. In simple terms, these uncoupling proteins poke holes in
the mitochondria inside muscle cells. The mitochondria are where most of your
energy is derived from, especially at rest. By poking holes in the mitochondria,
they produce less energy. So they have to burn far more calories to produce the
same amount of energy in the form of ATP.

Fasting also works through a number of mechanisms that lead to increased
calorie and fat burn and enhanced fat loss. Research also suggest that fasting
provides numerous health benefits, such as lower cholesterol and triglyceride
levels (Mattson and Wan 2005).

Some proponents claim that IF even benefits muscle building. But this is where I
disagree with their logic. There really is no research suggesting that IF benefits
muscle growth over a traditional diet. In fact, from my personal experience and
the data I’ve collected over the years, it would appear that IF would limit muscle
growth as compared to following the rules covered in chapter 27 for eating to
maximize muscle growth.

There is no debating the fact that intermittent fasting works well to enhance fat
loss. However, it is not a method of dieting that needs to be used from the get-
go. Instead, I recommend using it once you’ve hit a plateau and you can no
longer lower carbohydrate. Since you want to keep protein and fat as high as
possible, IF allows you one more step before you need to start whittling away at
those two critical macros to lower calories and continue losing body fat.

The following sample diets in tables 28.13 through 28.16 show how to apply IF
based on when you train. You will still consume the same number of calories,
grams of protein, carbohydrate, and fat as you did in the prior phase of the diet.
You should even consume the same number of meals. Since you are cramming
so many meals into an 8-hour time frame, meals will come more frequently than
you were eating, maybe an hour or two apart and as soon as 30 minutes in some
cases. If you find that you cannot consume this many meals, you can also
combine some of them. For example, the snack before dinner is a protein shake
and peanut butter. You can have this shake with dinner and enjoy the peanut
butter as a dessert.

While you should do your best to consume the same amount of food as your
previous diet phase, it is not the end of the world if you simply cannot. This is
one of the fringe benefits of IF. You often cannot consume that much food in the
8-hour time window, which lowers calories and aids fat loss. Yet this is also one
reason why you should wait until a later stage in your diet to employ IF. If you
start it too soon, you may not be able to consume enough food during your
feeding window, which will make it hard to drop calories in later stages as your
fat loss plateaus.

Although the meals in the sample diets still list breakfast, lunch, and dinner,
these meals may not necessarily be consumed at the normal time for that meal.
In the sample morning workout, if you finish your workout at 8:00 a.m. and
consume your postworkout meal at this time, your feeding window ends at 4:00
p.m. That means that lunch will be some time before noon and dinner would
probably be before 3:00 p.m.

You should also continue to include one high-carbohydrate day each week with
IF. You can either do the high-carb day as an IF day with an 8-hour feeding
window or try eating at any hour of the day to see what works best for you.
Some like having the ability to let the IF go for a day when getting their high-
carb day. It helps them stay true to their diet during the rest of the week. If that
works for you, then use it.
Step 7: Lower Fat and Protein
The low-carbohydrate IF should get you as low in body fat as you ever need to
go. However, every body reacts differently. So if you have hit a fat-loss plateau
with low-carbohydrate IF, then you will need to adjust your diet yet again. As
mentioned, once you are down to 0.25 gram of carbohydrate per pound of body
weight, it’s fairly impossible to go any lower in carbohydrate without removing
vegetables and protein shakes, which you really do not want to do. The only
thing left to do now is lower the other macronutrients—fat and protein. This will
bring calories down again and allow you to burn more body fat.

So you will cut out some protein shakes, such as with breakfast, and cut out
some fat from peanut butter and by reducing the amount of salad dressing you
use. This will bring protein intake down to about 1.25 grams per pound of body
weight and fat to about 0.25 gram per pound of body weight. And calories will
now be just 9 per pound of body weight, or about 1,800 calories total for the
200-pound person.

Of course, you will also continue to employ intermittent fasting to help with fat
loss because you are reducing calories through less protein and fat. Be sure to
add a high-carbohydrate day, but keep it within the 8-hour feeding window with
IF. See tables 28.17 through 28.20.
Step 8: Drop Protein and Fat Again, If Needed
Step 7 should be the last step that anyone would need to make to reach a goal,
even if it is getting to ridiculously low levels of body fat for a fitness or
bodybuilding competition or photo shoot. But, as I have said earlier, every body
is different, and there is always one person who is an outlier and does not
respond as you would expect. So if you have hit a plateau in fat loss and have
some more body fat to strip away, then you would simply continue making small
reductions in your calories by dropping more fat and protein. You could cut out
olive oil completely and use noncaloric cooking spray and just vinegar for salad
dressing. And you could reduce your protein meals by about a quarter of the
serving size. These small changes will allow you to keep calories slowly
dropping while you continue losing fat.


          Maintaining Your New Lean Body
A common question I get from those dieting down to low levels of body fat is
how to maintain that lean body without gaining body fat while trying to build
more muscle. It is quite possible to do so if you are very careful and detailed
with your diet. You simply can’t go back to the way you were eating before you
started to get serious with your fat-loss diet. That will lead to rapid fat gain
because your metabolism is a bit slower at this moment. Just like reducing
carbohydrate and calories was a slow and progressive process, so should be your
return to a higher-carb and higher-calorie diet. Simply put, you will reverse the
steps that brought you to where you now are.

Your strategy for gaining muscle but not fat will be to slowly move to the step
before your current step in the diet process. So if you left off at step 7, then you
will move into step 6 of the diet. How long you stay there depends on how your
body reacts. I would suggest staying with a diet step no less than two weeks
before moving to the next step. Your body will need time to adjust to the higher
carbohydrate and caloric intake. It will respond by increasing your metabolic
rate, which will allow you to consume more carbohydrate and more calories
without adding body fat or at least not adding much body fat. You will likely not
be able to maintain the exact amount of body fat that you reached in your final
stages of the diet while you are adding carbohydrate and calories. But if you do
it slowly enough, a very minimal amount of fat will be added.

If you find that you are gaining fat readily when you move up a step, do some
diet cycling. For example, if you are currently at 0.5 gram of carbohydrate per
pound of body weight and find that moving up to 0.75 gram of carbohydrate per
pound is putting some fat on your physique, then stick with the 0.5 gram for two
days and then doing a day of 0.75 gram and then back to 0.5 gram for two days
and back to 0.75 gram. Then eventually move to alternating 0.5 gram and 0.75
gram every day. Then eventually move into consuming 0.75 gram of
carbohydrate every day.

The nice thing about maintaining your lean physique by slowly increasing
carbohydrate and calories is that you can afford to include a real cheat day once
per week. So instead of having a “clean” high-carb day once a week where fat is
relatively low and you are focusing on low-fat carbohydrate like rice, oatmeal,
and popcorn, and you can also include some “dirty” foods like ice cream,
doughnuts, and pizza.
                            Appendix A

    Metric Equivalents for Dumbbells
           and Weight Plates
Following are tables giving conversions for common dumbbell and weight plate
increments. For weights not listed here, you can calculate conversions using this
equivalent: 1 kilogram = 2.2 pounds.
             Appendix B

    List of Alternative Foods In the
 nutrition chapters of Jim Stoppani’s
  Encyclopedia of Muscle & Strength
 you will notice that the sample meal
plans do not offer much variety. This
   does not mean that you should be
   eating those exact foods and only
     those foods. When it comes to
 nutrition, variety is always best. Yet
   many people worry that eating a
different type of meat for dinner or a
 different kind of fruit will throw off
their diets. In reality, you can replace
 most foods with similar yet different
  foods without having it affect your
   macronutrient and calorie totals
                         much, if at all.
The key to using these diets as templates but replacing the foods with different
selections is to choose foods that are of a similar kind and size. For example, if
you don’t have 8 ounces of top sirloin steak, you can replace it with 8 ounces of
chicken or other poultry, fish, or lean pork. If you want to replace a medium
apple, you can choose a medium peach or orange or pear. One cup of chopped
broccoli can be replaced with one cup of green beans or chopped zucchini or
chopped asparagus.

Refer to the following list of food alternatives so that your diet doesn’t become
boring and lacking in nutrient diversity.


                        Meat Replacements
The following meats can be used for any meal with the sample diet. You can also
replace any meats with about 2 servings of the dairy products listed later or 2
scoops of protein powder: Chicken breast Chicken thighs Chicken drumstick
Turkey breast Turkey leg

Lean ground turkey Lean ground beef Top sirloin steak Tri-tip steak Flank steak

Pork tenderloin Bison

Venison

Ostrich

Lamb

Goat

Salmon

Sardines

Herring
Trout

Tilapia

Cod

Halibut

Sole or flounder Arctic char

Shrimp

Crab

Scallops (sea or freshwater) Clams

Mussels

Oysters

Lobster

Squid

Octopus

Lean deli turkey breast Lean deli chicken breast Lean deli ham Lean deli roast
beef


                      Dairy Replacements
Unless you are allergic to milk protein or are lactose intolerant, you should
consider eating dairy at several meals to maximize muscle growth. Dairy
provides a good blend of whey and casein protein, which have been shown to be
superior for muscle growth. Each cup (8 oz.) of milk provides about 12 to 15
grams of carbohydrate in addition to 8 grams of protein. So watch your
carbohydrate intake if you are lowering carbohydrate.

       Greek yogurt
     Cottage cheese
     Low-fat string cheese
     3 slices or ounces of low-fat cheese (such as American, cheddar, Swiss,
     feta)
     1 scoop of protein powder
     4-6 oz. of any of the meats listed previously
     2 oz. beef jerky


                        Egg Replacements
Unless you are allergic to eggs, I highly recommend that you do not replace the
eggs due to the benefits they provide for muscle growth and strength. However, I
understand that some people cannot stand eggs, others are allergic, and some just
get sick of eating them. So if you must, feel free to replace the eggs with the
following:

     1-2 scoops egg protein
     1-2 scoops of a milk protein blend (whey/casein)
     1 serving of the dairy foods listed
     6 oz. of any of the meats listed


                   Vegetable Replacements
These vegetables can replace any vegetables listed in the sample diets.

Mixed green salad Asparagus

Green beans

Broccoli

Cauliflower

Onion

Bell peppers
Brussels sprouts Zucchini

Eggplant

Bok choy (chinese cabbage) Mushrooms

Spinach

Cucumber

Okra

1 cup prepared stir-fry vegetables


                       Fruit Replacements
Replace any of the fruit with any of these: Apple

Orange

Grapefruit

Peach

Nectarine

Banana

Pear

Asian pear

1 cup sliced strawberries 1 cup blueberries 1 cup raspberries 1 cup blackberries 1
cup cherries 1 cup grapes

1 cup sliced pineapple 1 cup sliced watermelon Kiwi fruit

½ small cantaloupe ½ small honey dew melon
                      Cereal Replacements
While oatmeal makes a great breakfast carbohydrate, you can replace it with any
of the following:

     Whole-grain cold cereal (such as Cheerios, Quaker Oat Squares, Kashi)
     Granola
     Whole-wheat waffle
     Whole-wheat or buckwheat pancakes
     Any of the following breads


                      Bread Replacements
The following breads can be used wherever bread is listed.

Whole-wheat bread Ezekiel bread Rye bread

Sourdough bread Whole-wheat english muffin Whole-wheat pita bread Whole-
wheat bagel Whole-wheat tortilla


                      Grain Replacements
While bread and cereal are grains, I separated them according to when they are
consumed. Cereals are usually eaten at breakfast or as a snack, and bread is often
used at lunch to make sandwiches or as snacks. The grains here are typically
eaten at dinner but can be eaten any time of day when grains (breads and cereals
included) are listed.

     Brown rice
     Whole-wheat pasta (small amount of marinara sauce)
     1 cup quinoa
     Any of the following beans listed
     Medium sweet potato


                       Bean Replacements
The following beans can be used wherever beans are listed or in place of any
grains.

Black beans

Pinto beans

Kidney beans

Navy beans

Lima beans

Baked beans

Lentils

Garbanzo beans
       Appendix C: Sample Meals for
          Cutting Carbohydrate
The following sample meals are for those making the next cut in carbohydrate
from 1.75 to 1.5 grams per pound of body weight (or 300 grams of carbohydrate
total for a 200-pounder). This drops calories to 16 per pound of body weight or
about 3,200 for the 200-pound person. Remember that these meal plans are
based on workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and have the
preworkout meal as a snack.
The following sample meals are for those making the next cut in carbohydrate
from 1.5 to 1.25 grams per pound of body weight (or 250 grams of carbohydrate
total for the 200-pounder). This drops calories to 15 per pound of body weight or
about 3,000 for the 200-pound sample person. Remember that these meal plans
are based on workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and have
the preworkout meal as a snack.
The following sample meals are for those making the next cut in carbohydrate
from 1.25 to 1 gram per pound of body weight (or 200 grams of carbohydrate
total for the 200-pounder). This drops calories to 14 per pound of body weight or
about 2,800 for the 200-pound sample person. Remember that these meal plans
are based on workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and have
the preworkout meal as a snack.
The following sample meals are for those making the next cut in carbohydrate
from 1 to 0.75 gram per pound of body weight (or 150 grams of carbohydrate
total for the 200-pounder). This drops calories to 13 per pound of body weight or
about 2,500 for the 200-pound sample person. Remember that these meal plans
are based on workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and have
the preworkout meal as a snack.
The following sample meals are for those making the next cut in carbohydrate
from 0.75 to 0.5 gram per pound of body weight (or 100 grams of carbohydrate
total for the 200-pounder). This drops calories to about 11 per pound of body
weight or about 2,300 for the 200-pound person. Remember that these meal
plans are based on workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and
have the preworkout meal as a snack.
The following sample meals are for those making the next cut in carbohydrate
from 0.5 to 0.25 gram per pound of body weight (or 50 grams of carbohydrate
total for the 200-pounder). This drops calories to about 9 per pound of body
weight or about 2,100 for the 200-pound person. Remember that these meal
plans are based on workout days. On rest days, skip the postworkout meal and
have the preworkout meal as a snack.
                                Glossary
In every discipline there is a lexicon of common terms that members understand
and use. These terms include both formal nomenclature and slang terms that
have been established by the community. To better understand the language used
in the chapters of this book as well as in the gym, consider the following terms.
This collection of terms is not exhaustive; it includes only the definitions that are
not found elsewhere in the book or those that need a clearer explanation.
abduction—Movement away from the body such as what occurs when you raise
   your arm straight out to the side.
abs—A slang term referring to the abdominal muscles.
adduction—Movement of a limb toward the body such as what occurs when
   your arm is straight out to your side and you lower it down to the side of your
   body.
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)—The molecular “currency” that provides
   energy in cells for everything from protein synthesis to muscle contraction.
adipose tissue—Where fat is stored in the body.
advanced weightlifter—A person who has strength-trained steadily and
   systematically for at least one full year.
aerobic exercise—Prolonged (usually performed for at least 20 minutes
   continuously), moderate-intensity exercise that uses up oxygen at or below the
   level at which the cardiorespiratory system can replenish oxygen in the
   working muscles. Common aerobic exercise activities are walking, jogging,
   running, cycling, stair climbing, working out on elliptical exercise machines,
   rowing, swimming, dancing, and aerobic dance classes.
agonist muscle—A muscle responsible for producing a specific movement
   through concentric muscle action. For example, during the biceps curl
   exercise, the biceps muscle is the agonist muscle.
anaerobic exercise—Exercise that is higher in intensity than aerobic work.
   Anaerobic exercise uses up oxygen more quickly than the body can replenish
   it in the working muscles. Anaerobic exercise uses stored-muscle ATP,
   phosphocreatine, and glycogen to supply its energy needs. Common anaerobic
   activities are weightlifting and sprinting.
antagonist muscle—The muscle responsible for actively opposing the
   concentric muscle action of the agonist muscle. Although this seems
   counterintuitive, the opposing force is necessary for joint stability during the
  movement. For example, during the biceps curl exercise, the triceps muscle is
  the antagonist muscle.
anterior—Anatomical term referring to the front of the body.
assistance exercise—Typically single-joint exercises such as the biceps curl,
  triceps extension, and deltoid lateral raise. These exercises involve only a
  single muscle group.
ATP—See adenosine triphosphate.
atrophy—Wasting away of any part, organ, tissue, or cell, such as the atrophy of
  muscle fibers caused by inactivity.
ballistic stretch—This type of muscle stretch involves dynamic muscle action in
  which the muscles are stretched suddenly in a bouncing movement. A ballistic
  stretch for the hamstrings might involve touching your toes repeatedly in rapid
  succession.
basal metabolic rate—The rate at which the body burns calories while awake
  but at rest (usually measured in calories per day).
beginning weightlifter—A person with less than six months of strength training
  experience.
belt—See weight belt.
bis—A slang term for the biceps muscles.
BMR—See basal metabolic rate.
bodybuilding—A type of strength training applied in conjunction with
  nutritional practices to alter the shape of the body’s musculature. The sport of
  bodybuilding is a competitive sport in amateur and professional categories for
  males and females.
body fat percentage—The amount of fat in your body, generally expressed as a
  percentage.
bulking up—To gain body size and mass, preferably muscle tissue.
burn—A slang term for the intense and painful sensation felt in a muscle that
  has been fatigued by high-rep sets.
cardio—See aerobic exercise.
chalk—Also known as magnesium carbonate, it is often used by powerlifters
  and Olympic lifters to keep the hands dry for a more secure grip on the
  weights.
cheating—The condition in which strict form is ignored in order to get a few
  additional reps out of a set. Cheating is not generally recommended because it
  can lead to injury. However, it can sometimes help a lifter push the muscles
  beyond muscle failure. An example of cheating would be forcibly swinging
  the upper body to help complete a standing biceps curl.
compound exercise—An exercise that involves more than one muscle group to
   perform the exercise. Therefore, movement occurs at more than one joint. For
   this reason, compound exercises are often called multijoint exercise. These
   types of exercises are the best choices for developing strength. Examples are
   the squat, bench press, and barbell row.
cool-down—Low-intensity exercise performed at the end of a high-intensity
   workout. The purpose of the cool-down is to allow the body’s systems
   (cardiovascular, respiratory, metabolic, and so on) that were used during the
   workout to gradually return to resting levels.
core—The superficial and deep muscles of the abdominals and low back that
   stabilize the spine and help to prevent back injuries as well as enhance greater
   overall strength.
cross-training—Participation in two or more sports or activities that can
   improve performance in each and help an athlete achieve a higher level of
   fitness. Examples are strength training and football.
cutting—The process of dieting in an effort to shed all visible body fat to
   emphasize the individual muscles.
definition—Visibility of the shape and detail of individual muscles. This occurs
   in people with low body fat.
delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)—Muscle soreness that develops a day
   or two after a heavy bout of exercise.
delts—A slang term referring to the deltoid muscles.
DOMS—See delayed-onset muscle soreness.
dorsiflexion—Moving the top of the foot upward and toward the shin.
EPOC—See excess postexercise oxygen consumption.
excess postexercise oxygen consumption (EPOC)—Elevated oxygen
   consumption above that of resting levels after exercise.
extension—The act of straightening a joint. For example, during the triceps
   pressdown exercise, the elbow extends. The opposite of extension is flexion.
failure—See muscle failure.
false grip—A type of grip in which the thumb remains against the side of the
   palm rather than wrapped around the bar as in a normal grip.
fast-twitch muscle fibers—Muscle fibers that contract quickly and powerfully
   but not with great endurance. Fast-twitch muscle fibers are best developed
   through strength training programs that employ heavy weight and low reps or
   light weight and low reps that are performed in a quick and explosive manner.
flexibility—Suppleness of joints, muscle fibers, and connective tissues. This
   suppleness allows a greater range of motion about the joints. Flexibility is an
   important component of overall fitness and is best developed through
   systematic stretching.
flexion—The act of bending a joint. For example, during the biceps curl exercise
   the elbow flexes. The opposite of flexion is extension.
form—Refers to the use of proper biomechanics during an exercise. This means
   that all movements are performed in such a manner that only the required
   muscle groups are used during the exercise and all movements are performed
   in a safe manner to avoid the risk of injury.
GH—See growth hormone.
gloves—See weightlifting gloves.
glutes—A slang term for the gluteal muscles.
glycogen—The form of carbohydrate stored in the body, predominantly in the
   muscles and liver.
growth hormone (GH)—An anabolic hormone that stimulates fat metabolism
   and promotes muscle hypertrophy.
hypertrophy—The scientific term denoting an increase in muscle size.
insertion—The point of attachment of a muscle most distant from the body’s
   midline or center.
intermediate strength trainer—A person with 6 to 12 months of bodybuilding
   experience.
isolation exercise—An exercise that involves just one muscle group and the
   movement of the one joint that that muscle group crosses. These types of
   exercises are sometimes called single-joint exercises. Examples are the
   dumbbell fly, lateral raise, and leg extension.
knee wrap—A band of elastic fabric that is wound tightly around the knee to
   support the joint during squats and other heavy leg exercises.
knurling—A grooved or roughened area along the gripping portion of a barbell
   or dumbbell that lessens the tendency for the hand to slip.
lean body mass—Total body mass minus fat mass; this includes muscle, bone,
   organs, and water.
lifter—Slang term that refers to a person who regularly strength-trains.
macrocycle—A phase in periodization that typically involves six months to one
   year but may be up to four years, such as with Olympic athletes.
mass—A term used to refer to muscle size, as in muscle mass.
mesocycle—A phase in periodization usually lasting several weeks to months.
microcycle—A phase in periodization lasting a week.
multijoint exercise—See compound exercise.
muscle atrophy—See atrophy.
muscle failure—The point during an exercise at which the muscles have fully
   fatigued and can no longer complete an additional rep of that exercise using
   strict form.
muscle hypertrophy—See hypertrophy.
negative phase of repetition—A term used to describe the eccentric portion of a
  muscle contraction. Emphasizing the eccentric, or negative, portion of the rep
  induces greater muscle damage than that caused by the concentric portion of
  the rep. An example of a negative phase is the lowering of the weight down to
  the chest during a bench press.
Olympic weightlifting—The type of weightlifting contested at the Olympic
  Games every four years as well as at national and international competitions
  each year. Olympic lifting involves two lifts: the snatch and the clean and jerk.
origin—The point of attachment of a muscle closest to the body’s midline, or
  center.
overhand grip—This type of grip, also known as a pronated grip, involves
  grabbing the bar with the palms down and the knuckles on the front or the top
  of the bar. An example is the grip used for the reverse barbell curl or shrug.
overreaching—Scientific term used to describe exercise training that pushes the
  body beyond its limits to recover and adapt. This usually involves training
  with too much volume, too much intensity, too much frequency, or all of
  these. Overreaching is the stage that occurs just before the athlete becomes
  overtrained. If an athlete stops overreaching in time, the athlete can avoid the
  deleterious effects of overtraining and actually rebound with rapid advances in
  strength and muscle mass.
overtraining—When an athlete overreaches for too long, he or she reaches the
  point of overtraining. Chronically exceeding the body’s ability to recover by
  overreaching causes the body to stop progressing and actually lose some of
  the gains that were made in strength and muscle mass. Besides impairing
  athletic performance, overtraining can increase the risk of injury or disease.
  The early signs of overtraining from too much weight include increased
  resting heart rate, difficulty in sleeping, increased sweating, and altered
  emotions. The early signs of overtraining from lifting too much volume or too
  often include decreased resting heart rate, digestion problems, fatigue, and
  lower blood pressure.
passive stretching—This type of stretching involves having a partner assist in
  moving joints through their ranges of motion. This allows for a greater range
  of motion than what can be reached when stretching alone.
peak—The absolute zenith of competitive condition achieved by an athlete.
pecs—A slang term that refers to the pectoralis muscles.
periodization—The systematic manipulation of the acute variables of training
  over a period that may range from days to years.
phosphocreatine ( PCr )—An energy-rich compound that plays a critical role in
  providing energy for muscle action by maintaining ATP concentration.
plantar flexion—Moving the top of the foot away from the shin, such as when
  pointing the toes down for heel raises.
positive phase of repetition—The concentric portion of the repetition.
  Examples of the positive phase include the pressing of the barbell off the chest
  during the bench press and the curling up of the weight during a barbell curl.
powerlifting—A form of competitive weightlifting that features three lifts: the
  squat, bench press, and deadlift. Powerlifting is contested both nationally and
  internationally in a variety of weight and age classes for both men and
  women.
preexhaust—The use of single-joint exercises before multijoint exercises in an
  effort to exhaust a particular muscle group so that it becomes the weak link in
  the multijoint exercise.
primary exercise—An exercise that is most specific to the goals of the lifter.
  These exercises must involve the muscle groups in which the person is most
  interested in gaining strength.
pronation—Rotating the wrist inward.
prone—Lying horizontally on the abdomen.
pump—A term commonly used by bodybuilders to refer to the swelling that
  muscles undergo during a workout. The pump occurs because when muscles
  contract repeatedly they create metabolic waste products that draw water into
  the muscle. The greater water volume increases the overall size of the muscle
  cells. This can lead to temporary increases in total muscle size of one to two
  inches. The pump typically lasts until the metabolic waste products have been
  cleared from the muscle.
quads—A slang term referring to the quadriceps muscles on the front thigh.
range of motion (ROM)—The range through which a joint can be moved,
  usually its range of flexion and extension. Exercises also have a specific range
  of motion that involves the movement from start to finish.
rep—Slang term for repetition.
repetition—Refers to a single execution of an exercise. For example, if you curl
  a barbell through the entire range of motion once from start to finish, you have
  completed one repetition (rep) of the movement.
repetition speed—The length of time it takes to complete one rep.
resistance—The amount of weight used in an exercise. Sometimes referred to as
  intensity.
resting metabolic rate (RMR)—The metabolic rate measured under conditions
  of rest. This is the minimal number of calories a person will need during a day
  to maintain body weight.
rest interval—The brief pause lasting between 30 seconds and 2 minutes, and in
   some cases even longer, which occurs between sets to allow the body to
   partially recuperate before initiating the succeeding set.
ripped—A term that means a body has clearly visible muscles and very little fat.
routine—A term that refers to an individual training program.
RMR—See resting metabolic rate.
set—A group of consecutive repetitions of an exercise that are performed
   without resting.
single-joint exercise—See isolation exercise.
six-pack—A slang term used to refer to defined abdominal muscles. The term is
   used because most people’s abdominal muscles create six bulges (three per
   side) when they are well developed and body fat levels are low.
slow-twitch muscle fiber—A type of muscle fiber that has high endurance
   capacity and poor ability to generate quick, powerful contractions.
split routine—A training program in which the body is divided into segments
   and trained more than three times per week, as most beginners do. The most
   basic split routine is done four days per week. The most popular type of split
   routine involves dividing the body into three parts, which are worked over
   three consecutive days, followed by a rest day and a repeat of the routine on
   day five. This is called a three-on and one-off split.
spotter—A training partner or a person who gives assistance to a lifter while the
   lifter is performing an exercise. The purpose of the spotter is to be on hand in
   case the lifter fails to complete a rep. In this case, the spotter can help the lifter
   complete the rep, which allows the lifter to train past muscle failure as well as
   avoid injury on dangerous exercises such as the bench press.
stabilizer muscles—Muscles that assist in the performance of an exercise by
   steadying the joint or limb being moved but not increasing the force applied to
   move the weight.
staggered grip—A grip in which the left and right hand have opposite styles of
   grip. One hand uses an underhand grip while the other uses an overhand grip.
   This is a common grip used during the deadlift because the alternated gripping
   allows for stronger grip strength.
static stretch—A low-force, long-duration stretch that holds the desired muscle
   at the greatest possible length for 20 to 30 seconds.
sticking point—The point in an exercise where the muscle is at its weakest.
striations—Fine grooves or bands on the surface of a muscle. The grooves are
   caused by the molecular machinery of the muscle fibers that are visible
   through the skin in ripped bodybuilders.
supination—Rotating the wrist outward.
supine—Lying horizontally on the back.
synergist—A muscle that assists in the performance of an exercise by adding to
   the force required for executing the movement. For example, the triceps
   muscle is a synergist to the pectoralis muscles during the bench press exercise.
tendon—A band of dense white fibrous tissue that connects a muscle to a bone.
   The movement of the bone is produced by the transmission of force from the
   muscle through the tendon to the bone.
testosterone—The primary natural androgenic and anabolic steroid hormone
   produced primarily by the testes in the male. It is also produced in smaller
   quantities by the adrenal glands in both males and females. Testosterone is the
   hormone responsible for maintenance of muscle mass and strength as well as
   the development of secondary male sexual characteristics such as a deep
   voice, body and facial hair, and male pattern baldness.
training log—A log that a lifter keeps for recording workouts. The information
   recorded usually includes exercises performed, weight used, number of sets
   performed, number of reps completed per set, amount of rest taken between
   sets, how the lifter felt during or after exercises, and what the lifter ate before
   and after the workout. This information helps the lifter assess progress and
   stay motivated to reach goals.
training partner—A person who trains with you on the majority of your
   training days.
traps—A slang term for the trapezius muscles.
tris—A slang term referring to the triceps muscles.
underhand grip—The opposite of an overhand grip. The lifter should grip the
   barbell or dumbbell with the hands under the bar.
vascularity—The visibility of veins through the skin.
volume training—The use of a very high number sets for each bodypart.
warm-up—Before any workout it is important to gradually prepare the body
   through low-intensity exercise. This helps to get the heart rate elevated so that
   oxygen uptake and blood flow to muscle tissue are enhanced. It also increases
   body temperature, which enhances the mobility of joints and the
   contractibility of muscle fibers. Good warm-up exercises include walking on a
   treadmill, riding a stationary cycle, doing light calisthenics, and doing
   lightweight lifting slowly and rhythmically.
washboard abs—a slang term used to describe ripped abs.
weight belt—A wide belt usually made of leather or nylon that is worn tightly
   around the waist to help support the low back and increase abdominal
   pressure. This is supposed to help prevent back injury and increase strength.
   Today it is recommended that belts be worn only during exercise training in
  which near-maximal weights are being lifted.
weightlifting gloves—Gloves made of leather or synthetic materials are often
  worn during weightlifting to aid in the grip and prevent calluses from
  developing on the palms.
working set—The set performed after finishing the warm-up sets.
workout—A single training session.
wrist straps—Strips of material (often canvas, nylon, or leather) that are about 2
  inches (5 centimeters) wide and 12 inches (30.5 centimeters) long with a
  looped end. They are wrapped around the wrist and the bar or handle that the
  lifter is holding onto to increase grip strength.
wrist wraps—Bands of elastic material that are tightly wrapped around the
  wrists to support them during heavy lifting or while performing exercises that
  place a high amount of stress on the wrists.
                              References
Ahtiainen, J.P., et al. 2003. Acute hormonal and neuromuscular responses and
  recovery to forced vs. maximum repetitions multiple resistance exercises.
  International Journal of Sports Medicine 24:410-418.

Altena, T.S., et al. 2003. Effects of continuous and intermittent exercise on
  postprandial lipemia. Medicine & Science in Sports and Exercise (5cSuppl).

Almuzaini, K.S., et al. 1998. Effects of split exercise sessions on excess
  postexercise oxygen consumption and resting metabolic rate. Canadian
  Journal of Applied Physiology 23(5):433-43.

Arciero, P.J., et al. 2001. Comparison of creatine ingestion and resistance
  training on energy expenditure and limb blood flow. Metabolism.
  50(12):1429-1434.

Arul, A. B., et al. 2012. Multivitamin and mineral supplementation in 1,2-
  dimethylhydrazine induced experimental colon carcinogenesis and evaluation
  of free radical status, antioxidant potential, and incidence of ACF. Canadian
  Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology 90(1):45-54.

Babraj, J.A., et al. 2009. Extremely short duration high intensity interval training
  substantially improves insulin action in young healthy males. BMC Endocrine
  Disorders 28;9:3.

Baker, D. and Newton, R.U. 2005. Acute effect on power output of alternating
  an agonist and antagonist muscle exercise during complex training. Journal of
  Strength and Conditioning Research 19(1):202-205.

Barringer, T. A., et al. 2003. Effect of a multivitamin and mineral supplement on
  infection and quality of life: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
  trial. Annals of Internal Medicine 138(5):365-371.

Becque, M.D., et al. 2000. Effects of oral creatine supplementation on muscular
  strength and body composition. Medicine & Science in Sports and Exercise
  32(3):654-658.
Blahnik, J. 2011. Full-body flexibility. 2nd ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.

Borg, G.A.V. 1982. Psychophysical bases of perceived exertion. Medicine and
  Science in Sports and Exercise 14:377-381.

Boirie, Y., et al. 1997. Slow and fast dietary proteins differently modulate
  postprandial protein accretion. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences of the United States of America 94(26):14930-14935.

Bosco, C., et al. 2000. Hormonal responses to whole-body vibration in men.
  European Journal of Applied Physiology 81:449-454.

Borshein, E. and Bahr, H. 2003. Effect of exercise intensity, duration and mode
  on postexercise oxygen consumption. Sports Medicine 33(14):1037-1060.

Bosse, J. D. and B.M. Dixon. 2012. Dietary protein to maximize resistance
  training: a review and examination of protein spread and change theories.
  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition 9(1):42.

Boutcher, S.H., et al. 2007. The effect of high intensity intermittent exercise
  training on autonomic response of premenopausal women. Medicine &
  Science in Sports & Exercise 39(5 suppl):S165.

Breil, F. A., et al. 2010. Block training periodization in alpine skiing: effects of
  11-day HIT on O2max and performance. European Journal of Applied
  Physiology 109(6):1077-1086.

Burd, N.A., et al. 2010. Low-load high volume resistance exercise stimulates
  muscle protein synthesis more than high-load low volume resistance exercise
  in young men. PLOS ONE 5(8):e12033.

Burd, N.A., et al. 2011. Enhanced amino acid sensitivity of myofibrillar protein
  synthesis persists for up to 24 h after resistance exercise in young men.
  Journal of Nutrition 1;141(4):568-73.

Burke, D. G, et al. 2001. The effect of whey protein supplementation with and
  without creatine monohydrate combined with resistance training on lean tissue
  mass and muscle strength. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and
  Exercise Metabolism 11(3):349-364.
Burke, D. G. 2008. Effect of creatine supplementation and resistance-exercise
  training on muscle insulin-like growth factor in young adults. International
  Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism. 18(4):389-98.

Cancela, P., et al. 2008. Creatine supplementation does not affect clinical health
  markers in football players. British Journal of Sports Medicine 42(9):731-5.

Candow, D. G., et al. 2006. Effect of whey and soy protein supplementation
  combined with resistance training in young adults. International Journal of
  Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 16(3):233-244.

Cribb, P. J., et al. 2007. Effects of whey isolate, creatine, and resistance training
  on muscle hypertrophy. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39(2):298-
  307.

Cribb, P. J. and Hayes, A. 2006. Effects of supplement timing and resistance
  exercise on skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Medicine & Science in Sports &
  Exercise 38(11):1918-25.

Daly, W., et al. 2005. Relationship between stress hormones and testosterone
  with prolonged endurance exercise. European Journal of Applied Physiology
  93(4):375-80.

Davis, W.J., et al. 2008. Elimination of delayed-onset muscle soreness by pre-
  resistance cardioacceleration before each set. Journal of Strength and
  Conditioning Research 22(1):212-25.

Deighton, K., et al. 2012. Appetite, energy intake and resting metabolic
  responses to 60 min treadmill running performed in a fasted versus a
  postprandial state. Appetite 58(3):946-54.

DeLorme, T.L. 1945. Restoration of muscle power by heavy resistance exercises.
  Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery American Volume 27:645-667.

DeLorme, T.L., and A.L. Watkins. 1948. Techniques of progressive resistance
  exercise. Archives of Physical Medicine 29:263-273.

Donovan, T., et al. 2012. β-alanine improves punch force and frequency in
  amateur boxers during a simulated contest. International Journal of Sport
  Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 22(5):331-7.
Drinkwater, E.J., et al. 2004. Repetition failure is a key determinant of strength
  development in resistance training. Medicine and Science in Sports and
  Exercise 36(5):S53.

Drinkwater, E.J., et al. 2005. Training leading to repetition failure enhances
  bench press strength gains in elite junior athletes. Journal of Strength and
  Conditioning Research 19(2):382-388.

Earnest, C., et al. 1996. High-performance capillary electrophoresis-pure
  creatine monohydrate reduces blood lipids in men and women. Clinical
  Science 91(1):113-118.

Ebben, W. P., et al. 2011. Antagonist knockout training increases force and the
  rate of force development. Annual Meeting of the National Strength &
  Conditioning Association.

Falvo, M.J., et al. 2005. Effect of loading and rest internal manipulation on mean
  oxygen consumption during the bench press exercise. Journal of Strength and
  Conditioning Research 19(4):e12.

Farthing, J.P., and P.D. Chilibeck. 2003. The effects of eccentric and concentric
  training at different velocities on muscle hypertrophy. European Journal of
  Physiology 89(6):578-586.

Fincher, G.E. 2004. The effect of high intensity resistance training on body
  composition among collegiate football players. Journal of Strength and
  Conditioning Research 18(4):e354.

Fish, D.E., et al. 2003. Optimal resistance training: Comparison of DeLorme
  with Oxford techniques. American Journal of Physical Medicine and
  Rehabilitation 82:903-909.

Fleck, S.J., and W.J. Kraemer. 2004. Designing resistance training programs.
  3rd ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.

Fleck, S.J., and R.C. Schutt. 1985. Types of strength training. Clinical Sports
  Medicine 4:159-168.

Friedmann, B., et al. 2004. Muscular adaptations to computer-guided strength
  training with eccentric overload. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 182(1):77-
  88.

Gonzalez, J.T., et al. 2013. Breakfast and exercise contingently affect
  postprandial metabolism and energy balance in physically active males.
  British Journal of Nutrition 23:1-12.

Gorostiaga, E.M., et al. 1991. Uniqueness of interval and continuous training at
  the same maintained exercise intensity. European Journal of Applied
  Physiology 63(2):101-107.

Goto, K., et al. 2004. Muscular adaptations to combinations of high-and low-
  intensity resistance exercises. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
  18(4):730-737.

Goto. K., et al. Inserted rest enhances fat metabolism during and after prolonged
  exercise. Annual Meeting of the American College of Sports Medicine, 2007.

Greenwood, M., et al. 2003a. Cramping and injury incidence in collegiate
  football players are reduced by creatine supplementation. Journal of Athletic
  Training 38(3):216-219.

Greenwood, M., et al. 2003b. Creatine supplementation during college football
  training does not increase the incidence of cramping or injury. Molecular &
  Cellular Biochemistry 244(1-2):83-8.

Hamalainen EK, et al. 1983. Decrease of serum total and free testosterone
  during a low-fat high-fibre diet. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry 18(3):369-70.

Hansen, K., et al. 2005. The effects of exercise on the storage and oxidation of
  dietary fat. Sports Medicine 35:363-373.

Hatle, H., et al. 2014. Effect of 24 sessions of high-intensity aerobic interval
  training carried out at either high or moderate frequency, a randomized trial.
  PLoS ONE 9(2):e88375.

Hernandez, J.P., et al. 2003. Bilateral index expressions and iEMG activity in
  older versus young adults. Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological
  Sciences and Medical Sciences 58:536-541.

Hildebrandt, A.L., and P.D. Neufer. 2000. Exercise attenuates the fasting-induce
  transcriptional activation of metabolic genes in skeletal muscle. American
  Journal of Physiology—Endocrinology and Metabolism 278(6):E1078-E1086.

Hoffman, J. R., et al. 2014. β-alanine supplementation improves tactical
  performance but not cognitive function in combat soldiers. Journal of the
  International Society of Sports Nutrition 10;11(1):15.

Hoffman J. R., et al. 2008. Short-duration beta-alanine supplementation
  increases training volume and reduces subjective feelings of fatigue in college
  football players. Nutrition Research 28(1):31-5.

Hoffman J. R., et al. 2006. Effect of creatine and beta-alanine supplementation
  on performance and endocrine responses in strength/power athletes.
  International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 16(4):430-
  46.

Hoshino, D., et al. 2013. High-intensity interval training increases intrinsic rates
  of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation in rat red and white skeletal muscle.
  Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism 38(3):326-33.

Issurin, V.B., and G. Tenenbaum. 1999. Acute and residual effects of vibratory
   stimulation on explosive strength in elite and amateur athletes. Journal of
   Sports Science 17(3):177-182.

Izquierdo, M., et al. 2004. Maximal strength and power, muscle mass, endurance
  and serum hormones in weightlifters and road cyclists. Journal of Sports
  Science 22(5):465-78.

Kaminsky, L.A., et al. 1990. Effect of split exercise sessions on excess
  postexercise oxygen consumption. British Journal of Sports Medicine
  24(2):95-8.

Kanda, A., et al. 2013. Postexercise whey protein hydrolysate supplementation
  induces a greater increase in muscle protein synthesis than its constituent
  amino acid content. British Journal of Nutrition 110(6):981-7.

Kelleher, A., et al. 2010. The metabolic costs of reciprocal supersets vs.
  traditional resistance exercise in young recreationally active adults. Journal of
  Strength and Conditioning Research 24(4):1043-1051.
Kelly, V. G., and D. G. Jenkins. 1998. Effect of oral creatine supplementation on
  near-maximal strength and repeated sets of high-intensity bench press
  exercise. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research 12(2):109-115.

Kerksick, CM, et al. 2006. The effect of protein and amino acid supplementation
  in performance and training adaptations during ten weeks of resistance
  training. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 20(3):643–653.

King, J.W. 2001. A comparison of the effects of interval training vs. continuous
  training on weight loss and body composition in obese premenopausal women
  (thesis). East Tennessee State University.

Knuttgen, H.G., and W.J. Kraemer. 1987. Terminology and measurement in
  exercise performance. Journal of Applied Sport Science Research 1:1010.

Kraemer, W.J. 2003. Strength training basics: Designing workouts to meet
  patients’ goals. Physician and Sportsmedicine 31(8).

Kraemer, W.J., et al. 2006.The effects of amino acid supplementation on
  hormonal responses to resistance training overreaching. Metabolism
  55(3):282-291.

Kraemer, W.J., et al. 2003. Physiological changes with periodized resistance
  training in women tennis players. Medicine and Science in Sports Exercise
  35(1):157-68.

Kraemer, W.J., et al. 2002. American College of Sports Medicine position stand:
  Progression models in resistance training for healthy adults. Medicine and
  Science in Sports and Exercise 34(2):364-380.

Kraemer, W.J., et al. 2000. Influence of resistance training volume and
  periodization on physiological and performance adaptations in collegiate
  women tennis players. American Journal of Sports Medicine 28(5):626-633.

Kraemer, W.J., et al. 1996. Strength and power training: Physiological
  mechanisms of adaptation. In Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, ed. J.O.
  Holoszy, 363-398. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

Kreider, R. B., et al. 2003. Long-term creatine supplementation does not
  significantly affect clinical markers of health in athletes. Molecular and
  Cellular Biochemistry 244(1-2):95-104.

Leosdottir, M., et al. 2005. Dietary fat intake and early mortality patterns - data
  from The Malmo Diet and Cancer Study. Journal of Internal Medicine
  258(2):153-65.

Li, K., et al. 2012. Vitamin/mineral supplementation and cancer, cardiovascular,
  and all-cause mortality in a German prospective cohort (EPIC-Heidelberg).
  European Journal of Nutrition 51(4):407-13.

Lugaresi, R., et al. 2013. Does long-term creatine supplementation impair
  kidney function in resistance-trained individuals consuming a high-protein
  diet? Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition 10(1):26.

Macpherson, R.E.K., et al. 2011. Run sprint interval training improves aerobic
 performance but not maximal cardiac output. Medicine and Science in Sports
 and Exercise 43(1):115-122.

Marx, J.O., et al. 2001. Low-volume circuit versus high-volume periodized
 resistance training in women. Medicine and Science in Sports Exercise
 33(4):635-643.

Mattson, M. P. and Wan, R. 2005. Beneficial effects of intermittent fasting and
 caloric restriction on the cardiovascular and cerebrovascular systems. Journal
 of Nutritional Biochemistry 16(3):129-37.

Mayhew, D. L., et al. 2002. Effects of long-term creatine supplementation on
 liver and kidney functions in American college football players. International
 Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism. 12(4):453-60.

Mazzetti, S., et al. 2007. Effect of explosive versus slow contractions and
 exercise intensity on energy expenditure. Medicine & Science in Sports &
 Exercise 39(8):1291-1301.

Meuret, J.R., et al. 2007. A comparison of the effects of continuous aerobic,
 intermittent aerobic, and resistance exercise on resting metabolic rate at 12
 and 21 hours postexercise. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 39(5
 suppl):S247.

Mirela, V., et al. 2009. Continuous versus intermittent aerobic exercise
  intermittent in the treatment of obesity. 6th European Sports Medicine
  Congress.

Mitchell, C.J., et al. 2012. Resistance exercise load does not determine training-
 mediated hypertrophic gains in young men. Journal of Applied Physiology
 113(1):71-7.

Moore, D. R., et al. 2012. Daytime pattern of postexercise protein intake affects
 whole-body protein turnover in resistance-trained males. Nutrition &
 Metabolism (Lond) 9(1):91.

Noonan, D., et al. 1998. Effects of varying dosages of oral creatine relative to fat
  free body mass on strength and body composition. Journal of Strength &
  Conditioning Research 12(2):104-108.

Nosaka, K. and Newton, M. Repeated eccentric exercise bouts do not exacerbate
  muscle damage and repair. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research
  16(1):117–122, 2002.

Olsen, S., et al. 2006. Creatine supplementation augments the increase in
  satellite cell and myonuclei number in human skeletal muscle induced by
  strength training. Journal of Physiology. 573(Pt 2):525-34.

O’Shea, P. 1966. Effects of selected weight training programs on the
  development of strength and muscle hypertrophy. Research Quarterly 37:95-
  102.

Paoli, A., et al. 2009. The effect of stance width on the electromyographical
  acitivity of eight superficial thigh muscles during back squat with different bar
  loads. biomechanical comparison of back and front squats in healthy trained
  individuals. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research 23(1):246-250.

Park, Y. et al. 2010. Intakes of vitamins A, C, and E and use of multiple vitamin
  supplements and risk of colon cancer: a pooled analysis of prospective cohort
  studies. Cancer Causes Control 21(11):1745-57.

Paton, C.D., et al. 2009. Effects of low-vs. high-cadence interval training on
  cycling performance. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
  23(6):1758–1763.
Pearson, D., A. Faigenbaum, M. Conley, and W.J. Kraemer. 2000. The National
  Strength and Conditioning Association’s basic guidelines for the resistance
  training of athletes. Strength and Conditioning Journal 22(4):14-27.

Peters, U., et al. 2007. Serum selenium and risk of prostate cancer-anested case-
  control study. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 85(1):209-217.

Pilegaard, H., et al. 2003. Effect of short-term fasting and refeeding on
   transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle.
   Diabetes 52:657-662.

Pocobelli, G., et al. 2009. Use of supplements of multivitamins, vitamin C, and
  vitamin E in relation to mortality. American Journal of Epidemiology
  170(4):472-83.

Poortmans, J. R., and M. Francaux. 1999. Long-term oral creatine
  supplementation does not impair renal function in healthy athletes. Medicine
  and Science in Sports and Exercise 31:1108-1110.

Poortmans, J. R., et al. 1997. Effect of short-term creatine supplementation on
  renal responses in men. European Journal of Applied Physiology 76:566-567.

Pullinen, T., et al. 2002. Hormonal responses to a resistance exercise performed
  under the influence of delayed-onset muscle soreness. Journal of Strength &
  Conditioning Research 16(3):383–389.

Racil, G., et al. 2013. Effects of high vs. moderate exercise intensity during
  interval training on lipids and adiponectin levels in obese young females.
  European Journal of Applied Physiology 113(10):2531-40. doi:
  10.1007/s00421-013-2689-5. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Ratamess, N.A., et al. 2003. The effects of amino acid supplementation on
  muscular performance during resistance training overreaching. Journal of
  Strength and Conditioning Research 17(2):250-258.

Ratamess, N.A., et al. 2007. The effect of rest interval length on metabolic
  responses to the bench press exercise. European Journal of Applied
  Physiology 100(1):1-17.

Rautiainen, S., et al. 2010. Multivitamin use and the risk of myocardial
  infarction: a population-based cohort of Swedish women. American Journal of
  Clinical Nutrition 92(5):1251-6.

Rawson, E. S. and Volek, J. S. 2003. Effects of creatine supplementation and
  resistance training on muscle strength and weightlifting performance. Journal
  of Strength & Conditioning Research 17(4):822-31.

Reed M.J., et al. 1987. Dietary lipids: an additional regulator of plasma levels of
  sex hormone binding globulin. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &
  Metabolism 64(5):1083-85.

Reidy, P.T. et al. 2014. Soy-dairy protein blend and whey protein ingestion after
  resistance exercise increases amino acid transport and transporter expression
  in human skeletal muscle. Journal of Applied Physiology 116(11):1353-64.

Reidy, P. T., et al. 2013. Protein blend ingestion following resistance exercise
  promotes human muscle protein synthesis. Journal of Nutrition 143(4):410-
  416.

Rhea, M.R., and B.L. Alderman. 2004. A meta-analysis of periodized versus
  nonperiodized strength and power training programs. Research Quarterly for
  Exercise and Sport 75(4):413-422.

Rhea, M.R., et al. 2002. A comparison of linear and daily undulating periodized
  programs with equated volume and intensity for strength. Journal of Strength
  and Conditioning Research 16(2):250-255.

Rhea, M.R., et al. 2003. A comparison of linear and daily undulating periodized
  programs with equated volume and intensity for local muscular endurance.
  Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 17(1):82-87.

Robbins, D. W., et al. 2010. The effect of an upper-body agonist-antagonist
  resistance training protocol on volume load and efficiency. Journal of Strength
  and Conditioning Research 24(10):2632-40.

Robertson, R.J. 2004. Perceived exertion for practitioners. Champaign, IL:
  Human Kinetics.

Robertson, R.J., et al. 2003. Concurrent validation of the OMNI perceived
  exertion scale for resistance exercise. Medicine and Science in Sports and
  Exercise 35(2):333-341.

Saremi, A., et al. 2010. Effects of oral creatine and resistance training on serum
  myostatin and GASP-1. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 317(1-2):25-
  30.

Sartor, F., et al. 2010. High-intensity exercise and carbohydrate-reduced energy-
  restricted diet in obese individuals. European Journal of Applied Physiology
  110(5):893-903.

Scalzo, R.L. et al. 2014. Greater muscle protein synthesis and mitochondrial
  biogenesis in males compared with females during sprint interval training.
  FASEB Journal. 28(6):2705-2714.

Selye, H.A. 1936. Syndrome produced by diverse nocuous agents. Nature
  138:32.

Sijie, T., et al. 2012. High intensity interval exercise training in overweight
   young women. Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness 52(3):255-62.

Smith, G.I., et al. 2011. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids augment the
  muscle protein anabolic response to hyperinsulinaemia-hyperaminoacidaemia
  in healthy young and middle-aged men and women. Clinical Science
  121(6):267-278.

Smith, A.E., et al. 2009. Effects of β-alanine supplementation and high-intensity
  interval training on endurance performance and body composition in men: A
  double-blind trial. Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition 6:5.

Soop, M., et al. 2012. Coingestion of whey protein and casein in a mixed meal:
  demonstration of a more sustained anabolic effect of casein. American Journal
  of Physiology—Endocrinology and Metabolism 303(1):E152-62.

Souza-Junior, T.P., et al. 2011. Strength and hypertrophy responses to constant
  and decreasing rest intervals in trained men using creatine supplementation.
  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition 8:17.

Springer, B.L., and P.M. Clarkson. 2003. Two cases of exertional
  rhabdomyolysis precipitated by personal trainers. Medicine and Science in
  Sports and Exercise 35(9):1499-1502.
Stone, W.J., and S.P. Coulter. 1994. Strength/endurance effects from three
  resistance training protocols with women. Journal of Strength and
  Conditioning Research 8:134-139.

Stone, M.H., et al. 1996. Training to muscle failure: Is it necessary? Strength and
  Conditioning Journal 10(1):44-48.

Tabata, I. et al. 1996. Effects of moderate-intensity endurance and high-intensity
  intermittent training on anaerobic capacity and O2max. Medicine and
  Science in Sports and Exercise 28(10):1327-30.

Tabata, I., et al. 1997. Metabolic profile of high intensity intermittent exercises.
  Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 29(3):390-5.

Talanian, J.L. et al. 2010. Exercise training increases sarcolemmal and
  mitochondrial fatty acid transport proteins in human skeletal muscle.
  American Journal of Physiology—Endocrinology and Metabolism
  299(2):E180-8.

Talanian, J.L. et al. 2007. Two weeks of high-intensity aerobic interval training
  increases the capacity for fat oxidation during exercise in women. Journal of
  Applied Physiology 102(4):1439-1447.

Tanisho, K., and K. Hirakawa. 2009. Training effects of endurance capacity in
  maximal intermittent exercise: Comparison between continuous and interval
  training. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 23(8):2405-2410.

Taylor, K., et al. Warm-up affects diurnal variation in power output.
  International Journal of Sports Medicine 32(3):185-189, 2011.

Tjonna, A.E., et al. 2007. Superior cardiovascular effect of interval training
  versus moderate exercise in patients with metabolic syndrome. Medicine &
  Science in Sports & Exercise 39(5 suppl):S112.

Tower, D.E., et al. 2005. National Strength and Conditioning Associations
  Annual Meeting, Las Vegas.

Trapp, E.G. 2008. The effects of high-intensity intermittent exercise training on
  fat loss and fasting insulin levels of young women. International Journal of
  Obesity 32(4):684-91.
Trapp, E. G. and Boutcher, S. 2007. Metabolic response of trained and untrained
  women during high-intensity intermittent cycle exercise. American Journal of
  Physiology—Regulatory, Integrative, and Comparative Physiology
  293(6):R2370-5.

Tremblay, A., et al. 1994. Impact of exercise intensity on body fatness and
  skeletal muscle metabolism. Metabolism. 43(7):814-8.

Treuth, M.S. et al. 1996. Effects of exercise intensity on 24-h energy expenditure
  and substrate oxidation. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 28(9):1138-
  1143.

Vandenberghe, K., et al. 1997. Long-term creatine intake is beneficial to muscle
  performance during resistance training. Journal of Applied Physiology.
  83:2055-2063.

Weiss, L.W., et al. 1999. Differential functional adaptations to short-term low-,
 moderate-and high-repetition weight training. Journal of Strength and
 Conditioning Research 13:236-241.

Willis, F.B., et al. 2009. Frequency of exercise for body fat loss: A controlled,
 cohort study. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 23(8):2377-
 2380.

Willoughby, D.S. 1993. The effect of meso-cycle-length weight training
 programs involving periodization and partially equated volumes on upper and
 lower body strength. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 7:2-8.

Witard, O. C., et al. 2011. Effect of increased dietary protein on tolerance to
 intensified training. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 43(4):598-607.

Yarrow, J. F., et al., “Neuroendocrine responses to an acute bout of eccentric-
  enhanced resistance exercise,” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise,
  39(6):941-47, 2007.

Ziemann, E. et al. 2011. Aerobic and anaerobic changes with high-intensity
  interval training in active college-aged men. Journal of Strength and
  Conditioning Research 25(4):1104-12.
                     About the Author




Jim Stoppani, PhD, received his doctorate in exercise physiology with a minor in
biochemistry from the University of Connecticut.

After graduation, he served as a postdoctoral research fellow in the prestigious
John B. Pierce Laboratory and department of cellular and molecular physiology
at Yale University School of Medicine, where he investigated the effects of
exercise and diet on gene regulation in muscle tissue. For his groundbreaking
research he was awarded the Gatorade Beginning Investigator in Exercise
Science Award in 2002 by the American Physiological Society. From 2002 to
2013 Stoppani was senior science editor for Muscle & Fitness, Muscle & Fitness
Hers, and Flex magazines. He is currently the owner of JYM Supplement
Science and jimstoppani.com.

Stoppani has written thousands of articles on exercise, nutrition, and health. He
is coauthor of the New York Times best-seller LL Cool J’s Platinum 360 Diet and
Lifestyle (Rodale, 2010) as well as Stronger Arms & Upper Body (Human
Kinetics, 2009) and PrayFit (Regal, 2010). He is also coauthor of the chapter
“Nutritional Needs of Strength/Power Athletes” in the textbook Essentials of
Sports Nutrition and Supplements (Humana Press, 2008). Dr. Stoppani is the
creator of the popular training and nutrition programs Shortcut to Size and
Shortcut to Shred, as seen on bodybuilding.com. Dr. Stoppani has been the
personal nutrition and health consultant for numerous celebrity clients such as
LL Cool J, Dr. Dre, Mario Lopez, and Chris Pine.
