CONTENTS

Cover
About the Book
Title Page
Dedication


WELCOME
  LDNM – who we are
     Lloyd
     Max
     Tom
     James
  How to use this book


GETTING STARTED
  Measuring your progress
  Weight loss
  Muscle building
  Set your goal
  Keywords, acronyms and buzzwords decoded
  Success at any size
LEANER
 Track your week
 ‘Good’ vs ‘bad’ foods
 Supplements
 Flexible dieting
 Myth busting
 Stocking up
 Breakfast
      Huevos rancheros
      Baked tomato with kale & goat’s cheese
      Smoothies
      Curried chicken Scotch eggs
      Eggs Benedict omelette
      Ultimate chocolate proats
      Homemade granola pots
      3-ingredient pancakes
      PB & J French Toast
      Honey fruit and oat bars
 Lunch
      Tuna & white bean salad in little gem cups
      Caramelised red onion soup
      Curried sweet potato & ginger soup
      Superfood wrap
      Soy sesame chicken & cucumber salad
      Mexican layer bowl
    Easy-peasy sushi
    Chicken korma soup
    Shake-it-jar salad
    Roast sweet potato & egg salad
    Salmon & quinoa bites
    Cheesy cauliflower fritters
    Coronation chicken
    Roast vegetables & Brazil nut pesto
Dinner
    Moroccan pizza
    Chilli no-carne
    Pumpkin & cauliflower curry
    The best vegan burger
    Marinated tofu stir-fry
    Beef ramen
    Pesto salmon parcels
    Chicken enchiladas
    Spicy lamb meatballs
    Satay prawn dippers
    Stuffed butternut squash
    Quinoa & mushroom ‘risotto’
    Beef tagine
    The Inside-out burger
    Burger with wings & lemon ‘mayo’
    Crispy cod with aubergine fries
    The Food Grinder Roast with sweet potato dauphinoise
     Stuffed rolled steak with sweet potato wedges
     Any-fish traybake
     Rainbow rice
Snacks & on the go
     Hummus 4 ways
     Courgette & feta frittata muffins
     Protein truffles
     PB-cookie-dough bars
     Carrot & walnut muffins
The sweet stuff
     Banana & chocolate (n)ice cream
     Banana bread
     Sweet potato brownies
     Lemon polenta cake
     Pistachio ice cream
     Chocolate orange pots
     Sticky toffee pudding
     Avo-choc truffles
     Apple & blackberry crumble
     Chocolate coconut cookies
4-ingredient heroes
     Easy-peasy chicken pie
     Fudge protein brownies
     Sweet potato frittata
     Leek, blue cheese & bacon
     Cream cheese, smoked salmon & spinach
       Tomato, mozzarella & pesto
       Beetroot, goat’s cheese & rocket


FITTER
  Myth busting
  High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT)
  Tabata circuits
  Gym-free workouts
  Buddy training
  Gym training
  Stretches


STRONGER
  Willpower vs perseverance
  Marginal gains
  Keeping up motivation
  Checking in with your goals
  Plateaus
  Fitting fitness into work and social life
  Visualisation
  Negative self-talk
  Tracking your progress

Acknowledgements
Results
Copyright
About the Book
Ditch the fads, ditch the fat and get lean for life - let Max, Lloyd,
James and Tom show you how.

This book is not a quick fix – it's a new way of life. Leaner, Fitter,
Stronger is about how to make a fit and healthy lifestyle work hard
for you; how to have a career, see your friends, go out, have a
family, drink, eat burgers and get in the best shape of your life (and
stay that way!). With Max, Lloyd, James and Tom as your guides
you’ll never feel tied down by a regime, like you can’t accept a
drinks invitation or like you have to force down that poached
chicken fillet that you’d rather swap for fries.

Featuring:

- Over 60 easy-to-do recipes from PB & J French Toast and cookie
dough protein bars to hearty salads, stir fries and roast chicken
with a twist
- Breakfasts, lunches, dinners, snacks and on-the-go, the sweet stuff
and 4-ingredient heroes
- Workouts for every body: Tabata circuits, home workouts, buddy
training, gym how-to's and stretches Plus advice to keep you
motivated, life hacks for fitting fitness into your life (and not the
other way around!) and a host of myth-busting.

These guys know their stuff; let them be your go-to-experts to
getting leaner, fitter and stronger for good.
We would like to dedicate this book to the entirety of the
#LDNMFamily who have been there since the beginning, and to
those who have joined our journey along the way – offering their
support and encouragement. Your loyalty has been invaluable
and provides the motivation for us to keep making key changes in
the fitness industry; from exclusive and unattainable, to
inclusive, realistic, fun, effective and healthy!
Any references to ‘writing in this book’ refer to the original printed
version. Readers should write on a separate piece of paper in these
instances.
Welcome
Hey – welcome! We’re so pleased you’re here :-)
   In your hands you have the tools to reveal a happier and healthier
You, in other words, You, but Leaner, Fitter and Stronger. There’s no
‘New You’ philosophy in these pages – we’re pretty certain that
you’re already pretty good as you are. But all of us at some point
have decided to make a change – whether you have been studying
too hard and want to exercise your bodies as well as your minds,
maybe you’re feeling sluggish and want to kick-start your system,
maybe you’re recovering from an operation, or just want to feel
better in your clothes. Whatever your reason, and whatever your
mission, you can be sure of one thing: we’ll be with you every step
of the way.
   We promise that this book is BS-free. There are no pie-in-the-sky
promises here. We want the changes that you make to be long-
lasting, and definitely not the kind of quick fixes that lead you down
the path of yo-yo dieting. We want to help you develop a new
lifestyle that is fun, effective, good value and sustainable. None of
us can stand fitness idols and celebrities who promote the latest fad
without solid evidence backing their statements. Fitness can be
simple, and a beneficial addition to your lifestyle – mentally,
physically and aesthetically – and this book will arm you with the
tools to achieve this.
LDNM – who we are
LDNM was created in 2013 as an interactive platform for us four
guys – James, Tom, Lloyd and Max – to answer the ever-increasing
number of questions we were receiving regarding our training and
nutrition, health and fitness.
   We started out working as lifeguards at Hampton Open Air Pool,
our local leisure centre, and trained together at the humble poolside
gym within the facility. We made a point of doing so steroid free,
and did our best to help colleagues and other gym members reach
their fitness goals.
   We soon began to grow a small local following, and a reputation
in the local area among younger guys and girls for delivering
results. At this point the fifth member of Team LDNM approached
us with the idea to create a website and social media platform to
answer questions, and to provide content on realistic training and
nutrition to build muscle or lose fat. We agreed, seeing it as a hobby
and even a time saver, but we never saw it snowballing into the
movement and brand it has become today!
   Online engagement was strong from the outset, and incredibly
exciting for us. After being burned by supplement companies and
fitness models – wasting our pay cheques on supplements
promising (and costing) the world – we set out to tell it like it is to
normal people. Unsurprisingly we experienced a lot of friction from
the fitness industry, which had been conning people unchallenged
for too long, with supplement companies offering us sponsorships
and individuals with more followers on social media trying to
stamp us out. However, we kept true to our mission to expose the
clouded industry of fitness, and to show people how they can get
leaner, fitter and stronger without negatively affecting their bank
balance and quality of life! Thankfully, people liked our message,
and the LDNM movement is going from strength to strength.
   We have come a long way since 2013, and built our following to
over 400,000 people across Twitter, Instagram and Facebook. It’s
over 400,000 people across Twitter, Instagram and Facebook. It’s
both our aim and our pleasure to maintain a personal rapport with
our loyal and new followers alike!
   Our LDNM transformation guides, which cover training, nutrition,
supplements and lifestyle for men and women, have gone from
simple Word documents to industry-leading guides in quality and
quantity of information and support. These guides have allowed
hundreds of thousands of normal people like ourselves, people with
busy work, school and social lives, to progress their fitness goals
sustainably, and we are proud of each and every success story, no
matter how small.
   We’ve also launched a successful line of apparel for training and
outerwear, as well as developing effective, good-quality
supplements that are available for a fair price. The LDNM Academy
was developed to better the industry standard of teaching, as we
felt that some operators were damaging their clients’ health, bank
balance and attitude towards health and fitness. The Academy has
come on leaps and bounds since it was started in 2015: personal
training courses, nutrition coaching courses and social media
events across London have all been sell outs.
   Our website and social media channels are packed full of training,
nutrition and lifestyle-based content (you can find us at
www.ldnmuscle.com). We aim to show people how to achieve
genuine balance and make fitness and nutrition an enjoyable and
valuable part of their lives. Getting leaner, fitter and stronger
should not be to the detriment of the lifestyle you enjoy.
   We have invested time, energy and passion into LDNM from the
moment it started. We wanted to create – and we believe we have
created – a safe, sustainable and realistic approach to health and
fitness, for anyone of any size or background. We wouldn’t be where
we are today without the unprecedented level of support from you
and everyone else reading this right now, and we are so truly
grateful for it. We all want to say a huge personal thank you from
all of us to all of you.



               “ Success can come at any size ”
“ Success can come at any size ”
Lloyd
I’m the oldest of three – Max, Lilly and me – and we’ve always been
competitive, whether it was eating, school or sport. Our parents
were keen to channel this competitiveness in a more productive
way, each finding time between their two jobs to ferry us to any
sport club within a five-mile radius – everything from gymnastics
(you could never tell now) to kayaking. Triathlon turned out to be
the sport I was least bad at (it’s easier to be bad at three sports than
it is one), and I spent most of my teenage years doing this, as well as
playing football and riding bikes.
   I left home to read chemistry at the University of Bristol, only to
find that there was no university triathlon club. When a second-
year student told me that rowing was the hardest thing he had ever
done, I decided that sounded like the sport for me. It was here that
my crewmate and good friend Pablo introduced me to weights, or
‘sculpting’, as he liked to call it, and I haven’t looked back. Being
naturally very slight, those first few months of muscle gain felt
great and I caught the lifting bug. I didn’t have any particular
physique in mind, I just wanted to be bigger than the 10-stone
triathlete I was! Over my three years at uni the majority of my time
was dedicated to rowing and lifting, training anywhere between
eight and twelve times a week, and my studies fitted around this.
   We won some big races and I built some muscle, but ended up
leaving with a 2:2 and no idea of the direction I was going to take
next. In my gap year at Hampton Pool I worked and trained with
Max, James and Tom while weighing up my options as a graduate in
the middle of the recession. It was here I decided to pursue my
lifelong ambition of becoming a Royal Marines Officer, something I
didn’t undertake lightly.
   Only taking one batch of around 50 officers each year, it was
always going to be a tough process and in 2012 I fell just short at
the Admiralty Interview Board; they suggested I retry the next year.
It was this year that James, Tom, Max and I decided to start LDNM.
  In 2013 I attempted to pass the AIB for the Royal Marines for the
second time and I was offered a place for the 2013 intake. Taking up
this place would have meant giving up LDNM as the two years of
officer training would have taken up all of my time. I decided to
take the biggest risk of my life and turn down my place in order to
pursue LDNM, hoping it was the right thing to do.
  Fast forward three years and LDNM has become a well-known,
reputable brand with over 50,000 customers, providing realistic
information that helps to change people’s lives. There has been a lot
of blood, sweat and tears along the way, but it has definitely been
worth it.
  Working at LDNM is great, but at times unpredictable as my
schedule can change at short notice. Mixing work with training
while seeing my friends regularly for a social drink or two, means I
often end up grabbing food on the go. Contrary to what you might
believe – and what you’ve been told – you can do all of this and stay
in great shape; you can enjoy your food (actual food, not just salads)
and a social life and still get the physique you want. All will be
explained later in the book!
Max
I’m a normal 25-year-old guy who loves a drink, a meal out, a
holiday (or two) and spending time with my family and friends. I’ve
always been involved in sports, competing in triathlon, cycling and
football. Unfortunately, two to five hours of exercise a day caught
up with me, leaving me with a chronic hip injury, which I’ve
managed since I was 16.
   It was then I started work at my local leisure centre, where my
brother Lloyd and the Exton twins introduced me to weight
training. Lifting replaced sports for me and at first it was as much
about vanity as it was about fitness: I wanted to look good, plain
and simple!
   In my naïve enthusiasm, I wasted money on supplements that
promised me a Hollywood-style physique. I also wasted my time
and risked my health with ridiculous eating and training styles. At
one point I would not eat any carbohydrates after midday as the
fitness media had demonised carbohydrates so much that I thought
this was the answer. In addition to this I would do one to two
sessions of cardio a day in an attempt to burn fat. This was
completely unsustainable and luckily I realised this after I
rebounded – putting on weight quickly – and becoming ill after a
lads’ holiday in Magaluf.
   I’ve since completed a degree in geography (BSc) at the University
of Birmingham while co-running LDNM. During this time I blogged
about balancing university life with training and affordable
nutrition, as well as co-writing the LDNM Guides. Finding time for
the gym became relatively hard in my second and third years, but
planning ahead of time and using exercise as my breaks and
downtime resolved this more often than not.
   Since I graduated in 2014 I have built a career as a personal
trainer while also running LDNM full-time. My working week can be
between 40 and 70 hours and is a constantly changing mix of clients
and LDNM duties. This makes training and nutrition an issue, but
and LDNM duties. This makes training and nutrition an issue, but
planning my days as realistically as possible and training before
breakfast means I rarely stop progressing towards my goals!
  I absolutely love what I do, helping my clients reach their goals
and couldn’t think of another job I would rather take on.
Tom
As a young chap, I used to do pretty much every sport under the sun
alongside my twin: swimming, cross-country, tennis, football,
triathlon – you name it. I think this was partly because James and I
had far too much energy, and partly our parents’ way of getting us
tired to give them some peace and quiet.
   Fast forward a few years and I began ‘training’ in the gym while I
was at university. By then, I had jacked in my sporting exploits in
favour of lie-ins and going out. I put ‘training’ in inverted commas,
because it was nothing more than cluelessly snatching at heavy
things sporadically in the gym whenever I had a few minutes
between lectures and daytime TV. This went on for about a year,
until I actually started looking into what I was doing, and – most
importantly – what I was eating. I’ve been ‘properly’ training now
for about six years and am still learning every day.
   My student days are long gone. These days I work full time, on
top of my role with LDNM. Finding the time is often an issue;
working for a bank in the City for the past five years, with an
inhumane commute and running a business or two on the side – it’s
tough sometimes to squeeze that session in. Even if I can find a
small window, I sometimes have to dig deep and ask if I can be
bothered. Ultimately, though, I ensure I find time as I always feel so
much better for it. Even if it’s just 20–30 minutes – I’ll make it
happen. I’ll just sacrifice a bit of dubious television in the evening.
Something I can live with.
   Currently I work out around five times a week. A lot of these
sessions will be a ‘lunchtime’ 25–35 minute job in the city. I find it
more than enough time for the smaller muscle groups if you keep it
intense. This said – legs are often Saturdays, and chest sometimes
finds its way into a Sunday.
   I always get asked what my diet is like. Answer? By no means
perfect. I try to follow my macros as best as I can, but given my
work and social life, I often fail to prepare meals (shock horror).
work and social life, I often fail to prepare meals (shock horror).
When this happens I make do with what I can find in ‘express’
supermarkets near the office. Not ideal, but I feel compromise can
be found occasionally without ruining your life. I make sure I’ve
always got healthy snacks in my desk for emergencies.
  The main driving force at the very start of my ‘training’ was a
mixture of curiosity, a touch of boredom and a desire to fill my T-
shirt out a tad. Gradually, though, fitness developed into a routine
and a way of life, and now I can’t see myself ever not being active in
one form or other.
  My motivation? It may seem shallow but I’m going to admit it: a
large part is just wanting to look as good as I can. I’m sure many
will echo this sentiment, possibly, just maybe not out loud… That
said, being healthy and fit is just as important to me – there’s no
point looking great if underneath you’re unhealthy, feel awful and
can’t run for a bus.
James
I’ve always been active. When I wasn’t wrestling with my twin
brother Tom, I’d be found playing a host of sports: football, rugby,
tennis, swimming, triathlon.
   But as education begun to take hold, with GCSEs and A-Levels,
time became more limited, I was unable to commit to the training
timetables required for competitive-level sports without affecting
my studies. Sport became a hobby.
   I studied law at Nottingham University, before being awarded a
scholarship to Nottingham Law School to complete the BVC (Bar
Vocational Course) to enable me to qualify as a barrister. It was
during my first year at uni that I discovered the gym. Seeing other
guys on campus with their tops off in summer and grabbing all the
attention, made me realise, for the first time ever, that I wanted to
be in ‘good shape’. By this I mean lean with a six pack. At the time I
saw myself more as a skinny sausage-shaped body! I started going
to the gym a couple of times a week with a few uni friends, and
became more and more motivated to change the way I looked. I
began to read up about training and nutrition, and started to
radically change the way I looked.
   When I came home for half-term, Tom said ‘How the hell did you
do that?’ The progress was clear, and he was absolutely livid, so
much so he got the bit between his teeth and started training with
me and continued it back at his uni. There is nothing to compete
with the rivalry between twins!
   Following university and law school I was formally called to the
bar and went to work in Oxford Street for a criminal law firm.
Despite long hours and long commutes, I always made time for the
gym. It was a good stress-release and I always found a way to
effectively manage the work–play balance.
   As criminal law is a predominantly government-funded sector,
work became increasingly hard to source and more sporadic. It was
at this time that LDNM engaged a loyal following and the brand
at this time that LDNM engaged a loyal following and the brand
started to become established. It became increasingly difficult to
balance legal work and the creation and growth of LDNM. At the
same time that this trade-off was occurring, my father was
diagnosed with lung cancer, and I soon found myself as a carer,
lawyer and aspiring entrepreneur! I spent hours caring for my
father, but with it being a digital company, I could be by his side
and work on LDNM at the same time. It became a way to channel my
emotions from what was happening. Dad took an active interest in
the growing company; he was proud of us. A little over three months
down the line, my father passed away following a truly savage
battle with cancer. I was left holding a family together, but more
determined than ever to make LDNM a success that he would be so
proud of…
  LDNM is now a way of life for me. I may have swapped
professions, and a barrister’s wig for an equally awful haircut, but
the work ethic is the same: this is a full-time, night and day,
working commitment that is growing and evolving on a daily basis.
How to use this book

This book is broken up into four sections:
  Getting Started: setting your goals
  Leaner: diet and recipes
  Fitter: fitness
  Stronger: mindset and lifestyle

GETTING STARTED asks you to set your goals according to the
SMART guide. Here, you will measure yourself, not just on the
scales, but also by using the tape measure and progress selfies.
You’ll determine how much weight you want to lose, or muscle you
want to gain, by calculating your BMR and TDEE, and we’ll decode
some diet and fitness jargon. We’ll also tell you that success
shouldn’t be measured by a number, and that you can be successful
at any size.

LEANER is where we will look at diet and the importance of macros,
dispel some myths and set you up for success with some delicious
kick-ass recipes that are healthy, nutritious and look great on your
plate.

FITTER gives you the building blocks for weight-loss or muscle-
gain success. You’ll be introduced to HIIT (high-intensity interval
training), which is great for improving your fitness and
cardiovascular health, and to exercises that you can do outside,
with a buddy, or in the gym. Plus we give you fitness routines for
whatever level of fitness you’re at.

STRONGER focuses on mindset and lifestyle. It acknowledges that
becoming healthy and fit is an ongoing process that needs planning
and perseverance to succeed. It looks at motivation, what it is, what
kinds there are, and how to keep it going if you reach the dreaded
plateau. It looks at changes to your lifestyle that you can make that
don’t mean giving up going out with your friends or eating the kinds
of foods you love. It looks at incremental gains and how you can use
them to get the results you want.


LET’S DO THIS THING!
Getting started
If you’re anything like us, as soon as you decide that you want to get
healthier, eat better, feel fitter and look great, you’ll want to start
right away. We understand that need to get started as quickly as
possible.
   First, however, you need to lay down the foundation for your new
and improved active lifestyle. You need to set goals, SMART
achievable goals that will give you something to aim for. You need
to give yourself a baseline by which to measure your progress, and
then you have to work out how much weight you want to lose or
muscle you want to gain.



          “ The sooner you start the sooner you’ll
                     see the results ”


MEASURING YOUR PROGRESS

If we want to lose weight or gain muscle, the natural thing to do is
jump on the scales. It’s what we’ve been conditioned to do, after all,
as many diet companies and weight-loss regimens see weight as the
best indicator of progress.
   But it’s not a great indicator of progress. And it can be very
dispiriting to be doing the work and feeling better in yourself, only
to have the scales tell you otherwise. Weight fluctuates so much
during the day and over time and can change due to so many factors
– how hydrated you are, what clothes you wear, what time of the
month it is if you’re a woman… the list goes on and on.
   Before you start, however, you need to take baseline
measurements so that you can track your progress.
   First of all, you should always track your weight and
measurements at the same time of day every few days or week; if
you need to, set a reminder on your phone. Wear the same clothes
and make sure that your scales are on a flat and steady surface,
ideally on the same spot each week, to get an accurate reading!
Make sure you have a pen and paper handy to record your weight,
or use an app on your phone (LDNM have a good one!), if that’s more
convenient for you.
  Once you’ve weighed yourself, break out the measuring tape and
measure the following: bust/chest (at widest point), waist
measurement and hip measurement.
  To find your waist measurement, locate the bottom of your ribs
with your fingers and then find the tops of your hips. Make sure
you’re not holding your breath and take your waist measurement at
the middle point. Write it down.
  To find your hip measurement, stand in front of a mirror and put
the measuring tape around your hips at the widest point. You might
need to recruit a friend to help you with this.
  You can write down your baseline measurements here:

  Weight:       ________________________
  Bust/chest:   ________________________
  Waist:        ________________________
  Hip:          ________________________



                         PROGRESS SELFIES



                      An important – and fun – way to
                   measure your progress is through the
                  progress selfie, which you can take after
                   you weigh and measure yourself. You
                  can take a few of these – front on, side
                     on, from behind (if you can) – and
                    compare them from week to week.
                  Progress selfies will show you, beyond a
                  Progress selfies will show you, beyond a
                  doubt, that your hard work is paying off,
                     even when the scales seem stuck!


WEIGHT LOSS

When people talk about wanting to lose weight, what they usually
mean is losing body fat. Losing fat isn’t simply depriving yourself of
food. There’s so much more to it, especially if you want to continue
to lose weight and do so in a healthy and enjoyable way, and then
maintain it once you’ve hit your target. There is no quick fix when it
comes to losing weight. Extreme measures aren’t the answer, nor is
simply guessing what you should eat or blindly following the latest
fitness fad on social media. Here’s a simplified but thorough
approach to working out what you personally should be consuming.
   Fat loss has a very simple rule, one that is common to every
single weight-loss ‘diet’: that it places you in a caloric deficit. To
lose weight, you consume fewer calories than your body is
expending.
   That’s it. No rocket science. No superfoods, avocados or
‘slimming’ teas have the power to make you lose fat if you aren’t in
a calorie deficit (and they won’t make you lose more fat even if you
are!). You could just eat fast food and still lose body fat if you are in
a calorie deficit, although we don’t advise this as it isn’t good for
your health.
   We are all unique. The number of calories one person consumes to
lose weight can cause another to gain weight, due to different body
size, body composition and amount of activity. Therefore the
amount of calories you need to eat to lose weight will be individual
to you.
   To find the number of calories you need to consume to lose
weight, we need to roughly calculate your maintenance calories –
the number of calories you burn every day going about your usual
business – and decrease from there.
   The first step in doing this is to calculate your BMR (Basal
Metabolic Rate) – the amount of calories your body needs to simply
Metabolic Rate) – the amount of calories your body needs to simply
maintain normal bodily functions such as digestion, temperature
regulation and respiration when you’re at rest. Basically, the
number of calories you would use if you were lying down in bed all
day.



                              BODY FAT %



                          HOW TO FIND IT
                       You don’t need to have an exact
                  calculation here, as this is a very inexact
                 science. The average body fat for men is
                 between 15–20 per cent and is between
                   22–28 per cent for women. If you are
                 below average body fat you should use a
                 lower number, whereas if you are above
                 average you should use a higher number.

                   As long as you are able to guesstimate
                   your percentage you will be able to
                     calculate your BMR reasonably
                                accurately.


  There are numerous different calculations but we prefer the
Katch-McArdle formula:

            BMR = 370 + (21.6 x lean mass in kilograms)

  Once you have your BMR you need to multiply it by your ‘activity
factor’, which takes into account the extra calories your body uses
in your day-to-day life, including your exercise regime.



                       WORKING OUT YOUR
                     WORKING OUT YOUR



                       LEAN BODY MASS




FIND YOUR ACTIVITY FACTOR

 SEDENTARY
 BMR X 1.2
 (sedentary work/daily routine, little or no additional exercise)

 LIGHTLY ACTIVE
 BMR X 1.3
 (inactive work/daily routine and light exercise/sports 2–4 days
 per week)

 MODERATELY ACTIVE
 BMR X 1.5
 (moderately active work/daily routine, exercise/sports 3–5 days
 per week)

 VERY ACTIVE
 BMR X 1.7
 (active work/daily routine, hard exercise/sports 6–7 days per
 week)
  EXTREMELY ACTIVE
  BMR X 1.9
  (hard daily work/daily routine, exercise/sports twice a day, full-
  time athlete, etc.)

If in doubt, choose a lower activity factor. For example, if you train
twice daily but otherwise have an inactive routine, use an activity
factor of 1.7.
   This will now give you what is known as your TDEE – which is
your Total Daily Energy Expenditure – this is the number of
calories you require to maintain your body weight at your current
activity level.
   For example, Laura weighs 78 kilograms and has determined that
she has an average percentage of body fat, which she works out as
25 per cent. Her job requires her to sit at her desk for most of the
day, but she does take a short walk every lunchtime and goes to a
Zumba class three times a week, giving her an activity factor of
‘lightly active’. Let’s do the maths.
   First of all, Laura calculates her lean mass. This is her body
weight in kilograms (78kg) divided by 100 (0.78) and then multiplied
by her body fat percentage (25%), which gives her a total of 19.5. She
then subtracts that number from her weight: 78 – 19.5 = 58.5. This
means that her lean body mass is 58.5 kg.
   With this number, she can now work out her BMR: 370 + (21.6 x
58.5) = 1,634 BMR.
   This means that Laura needs to consume 1,634 calories per day
just to maintain her body’s normal functions.
   Now let’s find Laura’s TDEE. As she is currently lightly active, we
need to multiply her BMR of 1,634 by 1.3, giving her a total of 2,124
calories, which is the number of calories she needs to consume in a
day to maintain her weight given her current rate of activity.
   To lose fat you need to eat less than your TDEE to place you in a
caloric deficit. But just how much?

HOW MUCH OF A DEFICIT SHOULD YOU BE IN TO
ACHIEVE FAT LOSS?
20% BELOW MAINTENANCE
conservative deficit (good starting point for people who have
average body-fat level)

25% BELOW MAINTENANCE
moderate deficit (good starting point for those with above-average
body-fat levels)

30% BELOW MAINTENANCE
aggressive deficit (maximum fat loss – recommended for obese and
time-sensitive deadlines, although possible weight regain
afterwards if diet is not controlled)

Let’s look at Laura again. She has determined that she has average
body fat and is happy to lose weight at a slower and more
sustainable pace. She decides that she is going to consume 20 per
cent fewer calories per day. Twenty per cent of her TDEE of 2,214 is
425. Subtracting 425 from 2,124 gives her 1,699. Let’s be generous
and give her an extra calorie, making the total number of calories
she needs for a conservative rate of weight loss as 1,700 calories per
day.

WHAT IS A REALISTIC RATE OF WEIGHT LOSS?

0.5–1.5% OF TOTAL BODY WEIGHT PER WEEK.

We have found this is a realistic level to aim for. The more body fat
you have and the newer you are to training, the more body fat you
can lose, which means – at the start of your programme at least –
the nearer you are likely to be to the 1.5%.
  As your body-fat levels decrease and you become more
conditioned to training, the amount of body fat you lose each week
will begin to drop.
  Laura, for example, is 78 kilograms, which is equivalent to 172
pounds. In her first week, she can expect to lose between 0.39 and
1.13kg. As she loses weight, that range will decrease.
1.13kg. As she loses weight, that range will decrease.
  Remember that your weight isn’t the only measure of your body’s
changing shape. If it seems that you’re not losing weight quickly,
check out your measurements and take a look at your progress
selfies and see how they change over time.

MUSCLE BUILDING

If losing weight requires a calorie deficit, building muscle requires
the opposite – a calorie surplus – that’s to say you consume more
calories than you expend. We will look at this topic in simple detail
here, our guides however explore other key variables such as body
type and macro splits, and meal timings.
   Once again, to build muscle you need to work out your BMR, then
TDEE, before you can be sure to place yourself into a surplus (see
here).
   Once you have your TDEE, you simply need add the amounts
below:
   MEN
   initially add 250 calories as your surplus and then 50kcal every 2
   weeks.
   WOMEN
   initially add 125 calories as your surplus and then 30kcal every 2
   weeks.

WHAT IS A REALISTIC RATE OF MUSCLE GAIN?

It depends on your starting point. A slower rate is likely for those
already accustomed to training, and a quicker rate for those new to
training.
   BEGINNER
   1–1.5% of body weight per month.
   INTERMEDIATE
   0.5–1% of body weight per month.
  ADVANCED
  0.25–0.5% of body weight per month.
With these numbers in mind it’s easy to set realistic expectations
and goals

SET YOUR GOAL

Each journey ends with a destination, and when you start out on
your fitness programme, you need to have a clear and specific goal
in mind. It’s not enough to simply want to lose weight or build
muscle, you need to decide exactly what you want to achieve and set
a time frame. It’s helpful to set your goal according to the SMART
method.

SMART GOALS

To help make your goal as clear as possible, use the SMART method.
SMART stands for the following:
  S specific
  M measureable
  A action-orientated
  R realistic
  T time-based
Thinking of your goal in this way makes it much more ‘real’, and
easier to ‘visualise’ (see here). It makes sure that you’re not dooming
yourself to fail by choosing goals that are unrealistic. And it sets a
time-frame, so that you can see that there’s an end in sight.
  Let’s say you’re a woman who is five foot eight and weighs 78
kilograms. Your goal might be the following:
  S to lose 10 kilograms
  M by measuring my bust, waist and hip measurements, taking a
      progress selfie, and jumping on the scales
  A doing the beginner’s HIIT programme 2x a week, doing the
      beginner’s strength training 3x a week, making sure I eat a
      satisfying breakfast every day, tracking my food and training
    every day
  R 10 kilograms is in the middle of the BMI charts for a healthy
    weight
  T I would like to lose five kilos by my best friend’s wedding in
    three months’ time

YOUR GOAL

Now that you’ve decided on a goal according to the SMART method,
here’s a space to write it down. At the back of this book we’ve also
included a SMART template for you to photocopy and stick
somewhere you see every day – perhaps on a mirror or the door of
your fridge.



                           YOUR GOAL
KEYWORDS, ACRONYMS AND BUZZWORDS
DECODED


DIETARY

CLEAN EATING
Only eating so-called ‘clean’ foods as an approach to weight loss.
For the record, ‘clean’ is not a word we use to describe foods or how
we eat; demonising or glorifying foods and entire food groups is not
only unfounded, it can cause damaging negative associations
around eating. Foods in themselves don’t make you fat or thin, total
calories does.
CHEAT MEAL
A meal that is outside of your intended calorie allowance, either
intentionally or unintentionally.
FLEXIBLE DIETING
A method allowing you to integrate any food type of your preference
into your total calorie intake allowance, while not disregarding the
need for a healthy approach to your diet.
IIFYM
The antithesis of clean eating: eating anything you want, so long as
it hits your macros.
MACROS
Abbreviation of ‘macronutrients’ – the major nutrients that provide
energy/calories. The three main macros are protein, carbohydrates
and fat.

TRAINING

BULKING
A widely used term to describe the process of increasing calorie
intake, to place you in a calorie surplus, the goal being primarily to
build muscle.
CUTTING
Another widely used term to describe the process of reducing
calories, to place you in a calorie deficit, the goal being to shed body
fat, and create a lean body.
DOMS
Or ‘delayed onset muscle soreness’ is the pain you often experience
the day(s) after a session.
FAILURE
When you physically can’t perform an exercise any more.
FORM/TECHNIQUE
The prescribed way/best practice to do an exercise to mitigate the
chance of an injury.
GAINS
A term used to describe the increase in muscle mass or weight.
HIIT
High-intensity interval training. An interval-based training protocol
said to have an after-burn effect for up to 48 hours after exercise.
REPETITION
One completed movement.
SETS
The amount of continuous reps you do is called a set.
TEMPO
The speed at which you lift during the exercise.

OTHER

STRONG NOT SKINNY
Placing an emphasis on getting fit, healthy and strong, rather than
extreme low-calorie diets that focus merely on an idealised weight.
Skinny doesn’t necessarily equal healthy.

SUCCESS AT ANY SIZE

‘Success at any size’ is a mantra you’ll see throughout this book. It
means exactly what it says: you don’t need to reach a certain size or
means exactly what it says: you don’t need to reach a certain size or
attain a certain physique to be successful. Society has a very narrow
perceived view of what is desirable or beautiful for men and
women, a view so narrow it’s unobtainable for most of us. Given the
number of photoshopping stories that are around, it’s even
unobtainable for the models and actors held up as society’s ideals!
  We’re two sets of brothers – including one set of twins – and none
of us has exactly the same body type, and none of us wants to look
exactly the same as the others. We’ve all taken different paths on
the road to fitness, and we all have encountered different challenges
along the way. We’re not cookie-cutter personalities, we don’t have
cookie-cutter bodies, and we don’t expect our followers to look
exactly the same or to want the exact-same things as each other.
  People come in all shapes and sizes, and the number on the scales
doesn’t say anything about you as a person. All it says is what you
weigh; nothing more, nothing less. It says nothing about your sense
of humour or your intelligence or your personality. So don’t be a
slave to it. Use the scales as a tool but remember their limitations –
weight can fluctuate from day to day, even from hour to hour – don’t
weigh yourself too often, and don’t get hung up on the number. Find
other indicators to show that you’re progressing – your clothes are
looser, your measurements are smaller, you can do that set of
repetitions more easily than you could a week ago and you’re ready
to move up to the next level of training. These are much better ways
to show how you’re progressing along your fitness journey.
  Your body is the ultimate multi-tasker. As you’re reading this, it’s
performing a huge number of conscious and unconscious actions,
from breathing to blinking to digesting your breakfast, to telling
you when you’re hungry or thirsty. And all this while you’re taking
in information through your eyes and interpreting it in your brain.
Sure, you want to feel better in your clothes, you want to be healthy,
you want to feel leaner, fitter, stronger, and that’s all good. Just
don’t let anyone tell you that your body is less than amazing.
  All we want from you is for you to be happy in your own skin. To
be positive about what you have accomplished in your quest for a
healthy body. To see obstacles as challenges, and to persevere with
your plan if you have the odd setback. We want you to enjoy doing
the things you love to do for as long as possible. We want you to be
the things you love to do for as long as possible. We want you to be
healthy and we want you to have fun.

Let’s do it. Let’s get Leaner, Fitter, Stronger.
LEANER
You’ve chosen this book because you want to change. You’ve set
your weight-loss or muscle-gaining goals (see here) and you’re all
fired up and ready to go. And here is where you should start, with
your diet, the foods you put in to fuel your body.
   Diet is crucial. In fact, it’s the most important part of any training
programme. You could do any number of planks, sit-ups or cardio
sessions, but the plain truth of the matter is that without a good
diet plan in place, you will not achieve the results that you want.
   When we say ‘diet’, we don’t mean banning certain food groups.
We don’t believe in ‘good’ foods and ‘bad’ foods. We certainly don’t
believe that you should refuse that glass of wine at your office
party. No. By ‘diet’ we mean the food that you put into your body. If
you want to change your body and make that change permanent,
you need to change your lifestyle, and your diet is a large part of
that.
   To become leaner, fitter, stronger, you will probably have to reset
the way you think about food. You may think of food in terms of
‘reward’ and ‘punishment’. You reward yourself for getting through
a hard day with a chocolate bar; you punish yourself for overeating
with a green salad. Or you might think of food as ‘comfort’,
something that you turn to when you’re feeling sad or lonely or
bored. You may be a foodie and are worried that a change in diet
will mean that you’ll have to give up the foods that you love.
   Food is fuel, it’s as simple as that. If you use food as a reward,
find something else that you can use to treat yourself with. If you’ve
thrown your diet plan out of the window one day, simply go back to
eating well the next – don’t try to limit your food intake in an effort
to make up for a day off the plan. If you’re eating food for comfort,
identify what it is that’s bothering or worrying you and address
that. If you’re a foodie, well, we’ve got good news. The food in our
recipe section is delicious, nutritious and looks great on your plate.
Yes, food is primarily fuel for your body, but there’s no reason why
it can’t be tasty and enjoyable to eat too!
TRACK YOUR WEEK

How well do you know what you eat? Do you make conscious
choices or do you just grab what you can, when you can? Chances
are, if you want to lose weight, you’ve probably not thought much
about what you’ve eaten during the day. It’s amazing how much and
what you can consume when you’re not thinking about it.
   You’re likely to be raring to go with the diet plan, but before then
it’s a good idea to track what you eat and when, over seven days.
You can either use a food-tracking app on your phone, or go
analogue with a piece of paper, or photocopy the tracker at the end
of this book. Don’t judge yourself during this week, and don’t cheat
– this is a very useful tool for working out when you eat well and
where you can improve. It can also show you flashpoints
throughout the day. Do you start off the day with a good breakfast?
Do you have breakfast at all? Do you have a chocolate bar at 3pm
because you’re feeling tired and need something to perk you up?
What happens at the end of the day – do you cook food from scratch,
or do you only have time and energy for a ready-meal?
   Finding out what your pattern of eating is will help you work out
how you can fit your new diet in around your lifestyle. During the
week, you might need ideas for breakfasts you can make while you
rush out the door; if you come home from work late, what meals can
you prepare in advance or whip up in a few minutes to avoid relying
on ready-meals or takeaways?
   At the end of the week, take a look at your tracker and see if any
patterns emerge. Do you eat well from Monday to Friday but you
find weekends are when you overindulge? Do you go out after work
for ‘just one’ with your colleagues, and it ends up becoming a bit of
a session? If you can work out what your flashpoints are, then you
can find strategies to put in place to avoid them.
   You will need to think about the food you put into your body a lot
at the start of your Leaner, Fitter, Stronger journey, but soon you
will find that you will automatically make better choices.

‘GOOD’ VS ‘BAD’ FOODS
The weight-loss industry in the UK is worth around £2 billion a
year. This means that as a society, we spend an awful lot of money
on something that rarely works. Most weight-loss companies rely on
repeat business to make money, which means that people who have
lost weight return to the plan that failed them once the kilos start
piling on again. This leads to yo-yo dieting and, more often than
not, you end up weighing much more than when you started the
diet.
   Weight-loss products tend to focus on restricting one type of food
group or another, promoting the idea that one type of food is better
or worse than another. And that thinking can be pretty hard to
shake. For years, fat was the enemy. Then it was carbs. But fat and
carbohydrates play an important part in a balanced diet. What’s
most important is the percentage of protein, fat and carbohydrates
that you put in your body.
   Try to release yourself from the mindset that one food is better or
worse than another. If you really enjoy chocolate, pop the occasional
bar into your eating plan. If you want to go out for dinner with your
friends, factor that in to your weekly food planner.
   We mentioned so-called ‘clean’ eating here and will talk about it
again here – this is because everywhere we look it seems like
something else is branded a ‘clean juice’ or a ‘dirty burger’; yes
clean rhymes with lean, but it does not equal lean. The myth of
clean is misleading about what constitutes healthy eating and can
be harmful; approach with caution.



                     OUR FOOD MANIFESTO



                            EAT BALANCED

                       EAT THE RIGHT PORTIONS

                        EAT WITH ENJOYMENT
SUPPLEMENTS

We see supplements as just that, a supplement to your diet and
nutrition to allow you to either increase your intake of a certain
element, or to increase the convenience of doing so.
  Many sports nutrition companies have unrealistic claims for their
products that are easy to buy in to and which don’t deliver (we
know – before we knew better, we bought into these claims
ourselves!). If you see a claim for a product that seems too good to
be true, it usually is.
  If you think of your diet as a pyramid, what should be at the very
bottom is a balanced diet including all the macros. What’s next is
sports nutrition, and then at the very top are supplements. These
should be used to back up your healthy-eating plan, not used as a
substitute for it.
  We’ve engineered our own LDNM supplements for this very
reason. Our supplements are of the highest quality at an affordable
price. Unlike other companies we don’t stock thousands of miracle-
promising products. Rather, we only sell a core range of products
that have proven effects when used as part of a good diet and
training plan and offer a tangible benefit for our users.
  These are the core supplements that we use, rate and recommend
and which form part of our LDNM supplement range
(https://supps.ldnmuscle.com).

Whey protein
Whey is high-quality protein derived from cow’s milk. When milk
turns and separates into curds and liquid, whey protein is
suspended in the liquid and isolated by an industrial process.
  Whey doesn’t have magic power to build muscle as some
companies claim; we prefer to think of it as a food rather than a
supplement. It’s a great convenience tool to help increase and reach
your desired protein intake at a meal, or as part of a meal
replacement when you are on the go. A fair few of the recipes in this
book use whey as an ingredient and we do recommend you go with
book use whey as an ingredient and we do recommend you go with
our LDNM products; yes we are biaised, but if we trust it, you can
too.
  Some companies sell ‘whey blends’, which often means they are
using cheaper proteins to bulk out their powders, so always check
the ingredients list and avoid products laced with inferior proteins
such as soy and wheat.
  If you are lactose intolerant or vegan, a good-quality hemp or pea
protein (ideally a ‘vegan blend’) is the best alternative to whey.

Instant oats
Instant oats are another supplement we suggest as a great
convenience food to help reach your desired carbohydrate intake at
a meal, to add extra carbohydrates or as part of a meal replacement
when on the go.
   As they are dense in carbohydrates, you only have to consume a
small amount to take in a high amount of carbohydrates.
   If you find the taste horrible, mix them with a little Nesquik,
flavoured protein powder or flavouring drops.

Creatine (Creapure)
Creatine monohydrate is the most-studied supplement in sport
science and is 100 per cent effective and safe. It saturates your
muscles’ stores of creatine phosphate, which allows them to retain
more energy for explosive, anaerobic activities such as lifting,
jumping and sprinting.
  Creapure is a high-purity creatine monohydrate; no other creatine
supplement will be more effective, regardless of price or marketing.
Supplementing with 3–5g mixed in water with your post-workout
meal or breakfast will achieve 100 per cent saturation of your
muscles. There is no need for a ‘loading phase’, which may lead to
bloating and gastrointestinal discomfort for some people.

Caffeine
You can get caffeine from tea, coffee, energy drinks or caffeine
tablets/powder.
  If supplementing with tablets/powder, start with 100mg of
  If supplementing with tablets/powder, start with 100mg of
caffeine before a session and steadily increase your dose each
session until you find your optimal intake. Don’t take more than
400mg a day in total.
  Caffeine powder tastes terrible, so we advise mixing it with
squash to mask the taste!

Pre-workout
Sometimes attracting bad press, pre-workouts have had their fair
share of media scares. For those with a high caffeine tolerance, or
when you are in dire need of an energy boost, these drinks can
power you through the workout you didn’t want to do. We see our
pre-workout more as a rescue remedy than something you should
become reliant on.

BCAAs
BCAAs, or branched chain amino acids, is a protein supplement. We
prefer powdered BCAAs to pill form.
  Supplement with 5–10g of BCAA powder during your workout. We
advise adding squash to improve the taste if the powder is
unflavoured!
  You only need to take BCAAs during your workout. Supplementing
with them outside of your workout will have little or no effect as
you should already be eating enough protein to maximise protein
synthesis.

Multivitamin
Multivitamins cannot replace nutrients and vitamins from whole
foods.
  They are good to ensure you are consuming the necessary amount
of vitamins and minerals such as potassium and vitamin B12, which
are deficient in many people’s diets.
  Long-term studies as to the benefits of multivitamins are
currently inconclusive, but they are not harmful and are
inexpensive so are worth supplementing your daily diet.

Vitamin D3
Vitamin D3
The majority of the population is deficient in vitamin D, which can
lead to a decrease in bone density and an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease and several different cancers.
  Supplementing with 1000–4000IU of vitamin D per day is widely
considered safe and effective.
  Supplement vitamin D at breakfast or any meal throughout the
day.

Omega-3
Omega-3 is a fatty acid that’s normally found in oily fish, seeds and
full-fat dairy products.
  These fatty acids are said to be essential to the normal
functioning of the heart and brain and may also aid joint health and
even help promote fat loss.



               “ Be realistic, remain motivated ”


FLEXIBLE DIETING

We feel very strongly that a diet that restricts the food that you
enjoy isn’t going to be sustainable in the long term. If you love ice
cream, for example, there’s no point in denying yourself the
occasional cone if you’re going to feel deprived without it. If you
want ice cream, factor it into your diet plan and enjoy! You’ll be
more likely to stick to your plan if you’re not craving ‘forbidden’
foods.
  Flexible dieting means that you can eat whatever foods you like
within your plan, so long as you stick to your assigned calories most
of the time. If you have calories to use up at the end of the day,
weigh out that ice cream so that it matches the calories you have
left and enjoy!
  If you’re going out to eat, check the website of the restaurant
  If you’re going out to eat, check the website of the restaurant
you’re eating at – many these days include the calorie and nutrition
content on their menus. This makes it easy to factor in a meal out
with your normal diet. You might want to lower your calories and
carbohydrates for a couple of meals beforehand too, if that puts
your mind at rest.
  Don’t think of your new eating plan as ‘Life vs Diet’, think of it as
a healthy, sustainable and enjoyable part of your new lifestyle.

MYTH BUSTING

Weight loss is the best indicator of progress
While you should monitor your weight at regular intervals, it
shouldn’t be the only type of measurement you use, and you
shouldn’t get too hung up on the numbers. What’s much more
helpful – and more fun to see as your body becomes healthier – is
taking progress selfies and body measurements. Progress selfies
will show you beyond a doubt that your body is changing, even if
the numbers on the scales are not moving downwards as fast as
you’d like.
  So many things can affect your weight – how hydrated you are,
how much food you’ve eaten, what time of day or month it is, even
the weather! So take your three measurements at the same time
every week or fortnight. Choose what day is best for you and pop a
reminder in your calendar. Try to make the conditions that you
weigh yourself in as similar as possible – wear the same clothes,
choose whether to measure yourself before or after a meal – and
stick to it.

Carbohydrates cause you to gain fat
Carbohydrate consumption alone does not cause you to gain fat.
You do not need to cut out carbs in order to lose weight, and cutting
out carbs altogether will lead to poor-quality training and mental
performance. You are also more likely to binge on foods you have
cut out, and this can also make you more prone to mood swings.
  You gain fat by one simple rule: on a regular basis you eat more
calories per day than you need to maintain your weight. These
calories per day than you need to maintain your weight. These
excess calories are stored as body fat.
  Remember that calories are a measure of energy, so if you expend
more calories than you consume – i.e., on a regular basis you eat
fewer calories than you need to maintain your weight – you will lose
weight.

You need to cut out bad foods
When considering only fat or weight loss and gain, food type is not
imperative – total calories are. This means you do not need to cut
out ‘bad foods’ entirely.
  Including traditionally ‘bad foods’ within a calorie-controlled diet
that is balanced and varied will not have negative health effects,
and will increase the likelihood of you sticking to your diet plan.
This consistency will allow you to improve your body composition
without degrading your quality of life.
  We feel reducing body fat and enjoying a flexible diet to be
healthier than yo-yoing in weight due to clean diets and periods of
no diet due to hating your previous clean diet and needing a break!

You must cook every meal
Again this is complete nonsense. You can absolutely opt for shop-
bought sandwiches, express rices and even ready-meals from time
to time. Including these within a balanced diet is totally fine. We
aren’t advocating a diet based on processed foods, but don’t beat
yourself up if here and there you take a cooking short-cut.
  Lots of people simply do not have time to search the supermarkets
for niche, expensive ingredients or spend hours cooking. Do not feel
you have to cook a masterpiece each time. In our recipe section
you’ll find a number of tasty and nutritious meal ideas that won’t
take up all of your time!

You must ‘eat clean’ to lose fat
‘Eating clean’ has become a buzzword in the health and training
community. But what is ‘eating clean’? It means different things to
different people, but it’s widely understood by the general public to
mean a diet consisting of only traditionally healthy foods. What
makes a diet healthy, though, is very subjective. Does it include
grains? Meat? Dairy products? What about sugar? What about fat?
Often ‘eating clean’ is endorsed by a celebrity or food writer, and
they’re often very restrictive.
  We think that cutting out foods that you enjoy because you think
they’re not part of an ‘eating clean’ regimen is ultimately destined
to fail. You don’t need to exist on plain chicken and steamed veggies
in order to achieve your fitness and aesthetic goals. You can include
the foods that you enjoy within your diet, as long as your diet is
balanced and calorie controlled. Remember what we said above:
burning more calories than you take in will make you lose weight.

You can’t put on fat on a ‘clean diet’
Some fitness bloggers and celebrities will say they lost weight
because they ‘cleaned up their diet’, but in reality they will have cut
calories by banning a list of foods (that they probably enjoy). This
also gives the wrong message that you cannot gain body fat on a
clean diet.
   Again it’s simple: if you eat too many calories per day from
chicken, avocado and rye bread you will gain fat. On the other hand,
if you know your calorie target for the day, choose to eat spaghetti
bolognese and sandwiches but keep within your target, you will lose
weight.

You shouldn’t eat carbs after 6pm
This is rubbish, especially if you are training later in the day (or
have trouble sleeping). As we mentioned previously, fat or weight
gain and loss are dependent on total calories for the day –
regardless of whether these come from carbs, fats and protein, or
fats and protein alone.
  If you are training in the evening you will likely have carbs in the
evening, before and after your workout, for fuel and for
replenishment. This is the smart thing to do, and carbs will not
simply turn to fat after a certain hour of the day. Carbohydrates in
your last meal of the day have also been shown to aid sleep due to
the hormones they cause your body to release.
Protein powder is only for bodybuilders
Protein powder will not make you bulky, and is not solely for male
bodybuilders. Whey protein shakes and suchlike are a handy
convenience tool when a meal isn’t an option, or when the protein-
based part of a meal isn’t sufficient.
  Protein powders can be consumed at any point during the day,
and are not only for pre-or post-workout, and certainly not for
during your training as some companies or individuals suggest.



                             THE 80–20 RULE



                          Very simply put, the 80–20 rule
                    means that if you eat healthy, nutritious
                   food 80 per cent of the time you can eat
                     foods you would typically consider ‘off
                   limits’ in a diet for the other 20 per cent.

                         Be careful though – spread that 20
                   per cent over a week, rather than having
                      a binge on one day. We don’t advise
                     having ‘cheat days’ because ‘cheating’
                       with your food is an example of the
                      ‘good food, bad food’ dichotomy we
                   want you to avoid. Plan that 20 per cent
                    just as you would the 80 per cent. That
                     way, you can enjoy everything you eat
                                  without guilt.


Skinny teas work
Skinny teas and fat burners are both ineffective and not worth the
money, in our opinion. Detox, skinny and gym teas are simply green
teas spiced up with some exotic ingredients and some even have a
mild laxative effect.
  Note how they only provide the ‘desired effect’ when combined
  Note how they only provide the ‘desired effect’ when combined
with the suggested diet and training advice, which consists of
minimal calories and lots of exercise. Combine this with a diuretic
and mild laxative and it isn’t surprising that people achieve weight
loss and attribute it to the tea alone! This is when in reality they
would have experienced the same results without the tea, just by
training frequently and eating a little less.

Quick fixes: detoxes, 7-day slims, crash diets
Quick fixes may work in the very short term, but when you revert to
normal eating and training habits, more often than not you’ll be in a
worse position than you were at the beginning.
  These fads – detoxes, 7-day slims, juice diets, etc. – put you in an
unsustainable routine, and too large a caloric deficit. To put it
simply, you progress in a manner you cannot maintain beyond a few
weeks and once you revert to your normal habit you put the weight
back on – and more!

Eating every 2–3 hours ‘stokes the metabolic fire’
The original idea behind this was that eating little and often would
keep your metabolism ‘ticking over’ so that you burn more calories
from digesting food.
  It turns out that your body burns the same amount of calories
whether you eat X calories over one meal or seven meals, so meal
frequency has no effect on body composition if total calories are
controlled.
  People who have fewer meals (two or less) may find themselves
binge-eating and overconsuming calories more regularly due to the
restriction of food and the build-up of hunger and food cravings.
  We suggest three to five meals a day, depending on your
preference and daily routine.

Cheat-day theories
The notion behind ‘cheat days’ is that you severely restrict your
calorie intake for six days of the week and on the seventh eat
whatever you like, without consequence, because it will ‘spike your
metabolism’: you will burn more of the calories that you eat and
metabolism’: you will burn more of the calories that you eat and
also prevent adaptation of your metabolism to the reduced intake.
  It has been shown that large spikes in calorie intake (a cheat day)
during a period of dieting will have no lasting effect of increasing
metabolism or preventing its adaption to the lower calorie intake.
  Small daily increases in calories – also known as ‘refeeds’ can be
useful during extended periods of dieting to ease the mental fatigue
of calorie restriction and increase energy levels for particularly
intense training days.

STOCKING UP

Here are a few things that we all like to keep in good supply in our
kitchens; they form the bedrock of many of our meals and are great
to have to hand for when time is short and inspiration limited!

STORE CUPBOARD
• Rolled oats – make a quick flour by blitzing in a food processor
• Tinned pulses – chickpeas, cannellini beans, kidney beans…
  endless possibilities!
• Olive oil
• Vinegar – we like balsamic and cider ones
• Coconut oil – don’t feel you need to cook everything with this, as it
  can get very expensive, but it is great for baking
• Tinned tomatoes
• Nuts
• Nut-butter
• Brown rice
• Basmati rice
• Honey
• Maple syrup
• Soy sauce
• Sesame oil
• Rice wine vinegar
• Ground spices – the easiest way to add flavour to a dish; have a
  healthy supply of paprika, chilli, cumin, coriander, curry powder,
  oregano, basil, cinnamon and ginger and you’ll never be far from
  a tasty meal
• Cornflour
• Tinned fish

FRIDGE
• Milk – cow’s milk, nut milk, drinking coconut milk
• Butter
• Free-range eggs
• Hummus
• Cheese – feta, halloumi, mozzarella
• Chicken

FREEZER
• Loads of veggies – spinach, peas, edamame beans, mixed bags
• Fruit – the supermarket bags of berries are great for smoothies,
  and if you have any apples or bananas that are going a little off in
  the fruit bowl, chop them up and freeze them in some tupperware
  (peel the bananas first)
• Wholegrain bread
• Pitta bread
• Wholemeal wraps
• Frozen prawns, fish and a pack or two of mince (beef, turkey or
  Quorn)
Huevos rancheros
Mexican food always hits the spot in our books, and this is our
take on a classic recipe. It’s quick and easy and makes a great
(and much fresher) alternative to a fry-up. Equally good for a
hangover too…

// SERVES 2 //
2 tsp olive oil, plus extra for brushing
1 small onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, finely chopped
½ jalapeño, sliced or pinch of dried chilli flakes
1 red pepper, thinly sliced
400g tinned chopped tomatoes
1 tbsp tomato purée
½ tsp coconut sugar
2 wholemeal tortillas
2 eggs
coriander, chopped
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

TO SERVE
1 avocado, destoned and diced
cherry tomatoes
grated Cheddar cheese
lime wedges


1 / Preheat the oven to 140°C/Gas 1.
2 / Heat the oil in a small cast-iron pan, add the onion and a pinch
    of salt. Cook over medium-low heat for 10 minutes, until softened
    but not browned. Add the garlic, jalapeño and red pepper and
    cook for another 5 minutes, just to soften the pepper a little.
3 / Add the tomatoes and tomato purée to the pan and stir together
    well. Add 50ml water and the sugar, bring to the boil and reduce
   the heat to very low. Let the tomatoes bubble away gently for 15–
   20 minutes, until reduced slightly and thickened. Season to taste
   with salt and pepper.
4 / Meanwhile, cut the tortillas into triangles or shards and brush
    with a little oil, and sprinkle with sea salt. Arrange on a baking
    tray, in a single layer, and bake for 3–6 minutes, or until brown
    and crisp. Turn them over once if needed.
5 / Once the sauce has thickened, use a wooden spoon to make two
    indentations in the sauce. Break the eggs into the holes. Simmer
    the eggs gently in the sauce, covered, for 8–10 minutes, or until
    the whites are opaque and the yolks still runny. Sprinkle with
    coriander.
6 / Serve in the pan with the tortilla chips, avocado, tomatoes,
    cheese and lime wedges on the side.
Huevos rancheros
Baked tomato with kale & goat’s cheese
This makes a really good brunch dish for a lazy weekend when
you have a little more time on your hands. Great with some
French bread or muffins too to soak up all the tomatoey-cheesy-
olive oil goodness.

// SERVES 3 //
6 firm, large vine tomatoes
large handful kale leaves, tough stalks discarded
1 garlic clove, crushed
1 egg
330g goat’s cheese, roughly chopped
few chives, snipped
2 sprigs thyme, leaves picked
extra virgin olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 180°C/Gas 4.
2 / Prepare the tomatoes by slicing the stem end off and reserving.
    Use a spoon to scoop out the seeds and tomato flesh, leaving just
    the shells. Put the tomatoes upside down on a paper towel to
    help drain out excess liquid.
3 / Roughly shred the kale leaves and put in a bowl with 2
    tablespoons water. Cover and microwave for 2–3 minutes and
    leave to steam. The leaves should just be wilted. Drain the kale
    and put back in the bowl with the garlic, egg, goat’s cheese,
    chives and thyme leaves. Mix together well.
4 / Place the tomatoes on a roasting tray. Sprinkle the insides of the
    tomatoes with salt and pepper and drizzle in a little olive oil.
    Spoon the goat’s cheese mixture between the tomatoes, filling
    almost to the top. Pop the lids of the tomatoes on top and bake
    for 25–30 minutes, until the tomatoes are tender, slightly
browned and the cheese oozing.
Baked tomato with kale & goat’s cheese
Smoothies
We love a smoothie at the LDNM headquarters; here are our four
favourites. These recipes make a healthy-sized serving for one
person.

ENERGY BOOSTER
1 frozen banana, peeled and sliced
200ml nut milk or milk of choice
1 scoop vanilla whey protein powder
1 tbsp peanut butter or cashew butter
2 pinches ground cinnamon


Blitz in a blender and sprinkle with cinnamon to serve.

BERRY BOMB
large handful frozen mixed berries
1 small banana, peeled and sliced
200ml nut milk or coconut water
1 tbsp almond or cashew butter
1 tsp vanilla extract
1 tsp agave syrup or honey
squeeze lime juice


Blitz the ingredients in a blender and serve.

THE GREEN ONE
1 ripe avocado
1 small frozen banana, peeled and sliced
large handful frozen pineapple pieces
3 large spinach leaves, roughly chopped
1 kiwi fruit, peeled and roughly chopped
1 scoop vanilla LDNM whey protein powder
200ml almond milk (or milk of choice)
200ml almond milk (or milk of choice)


Slice the avocado in half, remove the stone and scoop the flesh into
a blender or food processor. Add the banana, pineapple, spinach,
kiwi, vanilla whey and milk. Blitz until smooth and drink
immediately.

GINGERBREAD PROTEIN SHAKE
1 banana, peeled and sliced
pinch ground cinnamon
pinch ground cloves
½ tsp ground ginger
1 scoop vanilla LDNM whey protein powder
250ml almond milk (or milk of choice)
handful ice cubes


Blitz the ingredients in a blender or food processor and drink
immediately.
Smoothies
Curried chicken Scotch eggs
Our twist on a classic snack. Although normally associated with
pubs and picnics, these make a great protein-packed and portable
breakfast; they can be kept in the fridge for up to three days so
make a batch on Sunday and you’ll be laughing till hump-day.

// SERVES 4 //
4 eggs
approx. 1 litre sunflower or vegetable oil, for frying

CHICKEN CASING
400g minced chicken
2 garlic cloves, crushed to a paste, with a pinch of salt
2 tsp ground cumin
1 tbsp curry powder
¼ tsp ground white pepper
1 green or red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped
2 tbsp finely chopped coriander
1½ tsp salt

CRUMBED CASING
40g plain flour or oat flour
1 egg
splash milk
50g panko breadcrumbs
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Put the eggs in a pan and cover with cold water. Bring to the boil,
    reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 5 minutes. Drain and
    rinse under cold water to stop the eggs from cooking further.
    When cool enough to handle, peel.
2 / Put all the ingredients for the chicken in a bowl and mix well.
    Test the seasoning by frying up a little morsel of the mixture in a
    pan, then adjust to your liking. Remember if you’re serving these
   cold, the salt will dull down. Divide the mixture into four
   meatballs.
3 / Season the flour with salt and pepper in one shallow bowl. Beat
    the eggs with the milk in another bowl and have the
    breadcrumbs spread out on a plate.
4 / Put a sheet of clingfilm on a work surface and lightly flour. Put
    one meatball in the centre and flour lightly, then place another
    sheet of clingfilm on top. Roll out the meat until large enough to
    encase an egg. Remove the top sheet of clingfilm.
5 / Dip the cooked egg in flour and dust off any excess. Place the egg
    in the centre of the meat. Bring up the sides of the clingfilm to
    encase it and smooth into a nice round. Dip each egg in flour,
    then beaten egg, followed by the breadcrumbs.
6 / Heat enough oil in a pan to come to about 3cm up the sides until
    it reaches about 170°C. If you don’t have a thermometer, test the
    heat by dropping a crumb of bread into the hot oil; if it sizzles
    and turns golden but doesn’t burn the oil is good to go. Cook the
    eggs a couple at a time for about 8–9 minutes, turning over as the
    outsides brown, until golden and crisp on the surface and done
    in the middle. Drain on kitchen paper and allow to cool
    completely before eating.
Eggs Benedict omelette
Who knows where Eggs Benedict really came from – all that
matters is that it did. Thank you Benedict.
 This muffin-free version is both quick and feels luxurious, a
winning combination in our books.

// SERVES 1 //
1–2 rashers streaky bacon or slices ham
2 eggs
½ tsp Dijon mustard
pinch cayenne
few chives, snipped
small knob butter
small handful grated Gruyère
1 tbsp jarred hollandaise sauce
lemon wedge, to serve
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Fry the bacon in a pan until nicely crisp or as done as you like.
    Chop up into small, bite-sized pieces.
2 / Crack the eggs into a bowl and whisk with the mustard, cayenne,
    chives and salt and pepper. Add the bacon pieces.
3 / Melt the butter in a pan over medium heat until foaming, add the
    eggs and move the pan around to spread them out evenly. When
    the omelette starts to firm up but still has a little raw egg on top,
    sprinkle over the cheese and dollop with hollandaise sauce. Use a
    spatula to gently fold half of the omelette over, into a half-moon.
    Cook for 2 minutes, until golden at the base, then flip over and
    cook the other side until golden. The omelette should be oozing
    with cheese and quite puffed on top.
4 / Remove from the heat and serve with a squeeze of lemon juice.
Ultimate chocolate proats
Protein + Oats = Proats
  Sadly we can’t claim credit for this winner of a word-mash, but
we can claim credit for this awesome mix of goodness, all made
overnight while you sleep for extra ease.

// SERVES 2 //
1 banana
100g porridge oats
2 tbsp honey
3 scoops chocolate whey protein powder
1 tbsp raw cocoa powder or cacao nibs
350–380ml almond milk
1 tbsp cashew or almond butter (optional)
fresh mixed berries, to serve


1 / Peel and slice the banana into a large bowl and roughly mash
    with a fork. Add the oats, honey, chocolate whey powder, cocoa
    powder and 350ml milk. Cover with clingfilm and leave in the
    fridge overnight.
2 / The next day, the mixture will have thickened so add a bit more
    milk. Serve with a dollop of cashew butter (if using) and fresh
    berries tumbled over the top.
Homemade granola pots
The smell of homemade granola baking is a thing of beauty; layer
up with your favourite yoghurt and fruit and you’re on to a
winner.

// MAKES 8 SERVINGS //
100g coconut oil
6 tbsp maple syrup
2 tsp vanilla extract
300g jumbo rolled oats
300g mixed nuts (walnuts, pecans, almonds, cashews, hazelnuts)
100g ground almonds
100g mixed seeds (pumpkin, sunflower, sesame)
1 tbsp ground cinnamon
sea salt
200g dried fruit (prunes, figs, apricots, raisins, cherries, roughly chopped if large)

TO SERVE
fresh fruit of your choice
Greek yoghurt


1 / Preheat the oven to 190ºC/Gas 5.
2 / Melt the coconut oil in a saucepan and stir in the maple syrup
    and vanilla extract.
3 / Put the oats in a large mixing bowl and add the mixed nuts (chop
    these in half if you like, but leave them quite chunky), ground
    almonds, seeds, ground cinnamon and a good pinch of salt. Stir
    everything together well. Pour the liquid ingredients into the
    bowl and stir until everything is well incorporated.
4 / Divide the mixture between 2 large baking trays and bake in the
    oven for 15 minutes. Take the trays out, give everything a stir,
    then switch the trays around and bake for a further 15 minutes,
   or until golden and crisp.
5 / Leave the granola to cool in the trays and, once cooled, mix in the
    chopped dried fruit.
6 / To serve, layer up the granola in a glass, alternating with
    spoonfuls of fresh Greek yoghurt and chopped fresh fruit. Store
    any remaining granola in an airtight container for up to 2 weeks.
3-ingredient pancakes
These sound like they shouldn’t work, but trust us – they really
do! Perfect for brunch as well as taking in to the office, we like
ours with lightly caramelised banana, but anything from berries
to grilled bacon works a treat.

// MAKES 6–8 //
2 small ripe bananas
2 heaped tbsp peanut butter
2 eggs, lightly beaten
coconut oil, for frying

TOPPING
1 tbsp coconut oil
1 small banana, sliced
pinch ground cinnamon
natural yoghurt
finely grated zest of 1 lime


1 / Mash the bananas with a fork until almost smooth. Add the
    peanut butter and mash together as much as you can to make a
    smooth mixture. Fold through the eggs until just combined.
2 / Heat the tablespoon of coconut oil in a small frying pan over
    medium heat. Slide the banana slices into the pan, sprinkle with
    cinnamon and let the banana brown and caramelise slightly at
    the edges, about 4–5 minutes. Flip over to brown the other side
    but don’t overcook them to the point where they go too soft. Keep
    warm.
3 / Heat the oil in a frying pan over medium heat. Add spoonfuls of
    the pancake mixture to the pan and cook for 3–4 minutes, until
    the bottoms are golden brown. Flip over and continue to cook the
    other side for a further 3 minutes, or until cooked through.
  Continue cooking in batches until you run out of mixture.
4 / Serve the pancakes with the bananas toppled over, yoghurt
    dolloped on top and sprinkled with lime zest.
3-ingredient pancakes
PB & J French Toast
Behold the stuffed French Toast. It’s actually a lot healthier than
the ooziness might suggest, but definitely still packs one hell of a
punch.

// MAKES 2 //
150g frozen raspberries
squeeze lemon juice
1 tbsp agave syrup or honey
2–3 tbsp smooth peanut butter
4 slices wholegrain bread (slightly stale is also good)
2 eggs
60ml almond milk
coconut oil


1 / Heat the raspberries, lemon juice and agave syrup or honey in a
    pan. Bring to a simmer and let the raspberries pop and bubble
    away for 5–8 minutes, until syrupy.
2 / Spread the peanut butter on two slices of bread and layer on the
    raspberry coulis. Top each slice of bread with the unbuttered
    bread to create two sandwiches.
3 / In a shallow bowl, beat the eggs and whisk together with the
    milk. Working with one at a time, dip the sandwiches into the egg
    mixture, turning to coat all over.
4 / Melt the coconut oil in a frying pan over medium heat and fry the
    soaked sandwiches for 4–6 minutes, or until brown, before
    flipping to cook the other side. Remove from the pan, cut in half
    and serve with extra raspberry coulis on the side.
PB & J French Toast
Honey fruit and oat bars
These are such a great thing to have a stash of, either at home as
a grab-and-go breakfast, or to keep in your office for snack-time.

// MAKES 10–15 //
½ tsp ground cinnamon
200g jumbo oats
90g dried pitted dates, finely chopped
90g dried apricots, chopped (or raisins)
90g dried mango, chopped
50g chopped mixed nuts (almonds, cashews, hazelnuts)
100g unsalted butter, cubed
50g coconut sugar or raw sugar
140g honey
130ml fresh apple or orange juice
finely grated zest of 1 orange
pinch sea salt
120g mixed seeds (pumpkin, sunflower and sesame seeds)


1 / Preheat the oven to 180°C/Gas 4. Line a rectangular baking tray
    with baking parchment.
2 / Combine the cinnamon, oats, dried fruit and nuts in a bowl.
3 / Heat the butter, sugar, honey, fruit juice and orange zest in a
    saucepan over low heat. Stir occasionally until the butter has
    melted and the ingredients have combined. Take off the heat, add
    the cinnamon oats, dried fruit and nuts. Stir well, then mix in the
    salt and about 90g of the seeds.
4 / Spread the mixture into the prepared tin and flatten the surface
    with the back of a spoon. Sprinkle over the remaining seeds. Bake
    for 25–30 minutes, until golden brown.
5 / Let cool in the tin for at least 10 minutes before turning out and
    cutting into fingers. These will keep for up to 10 days in an
    airtight jar.
Tuna & white bean salad in little gem
cups
These light little bites are satisfyingly savoury; they also make
great canapés for when you have friends over and are feeling
fancy.

// MAKES 6 //
80g tinned tuna, drained
200g tinned cannellini beans or other white beans, well rinsed and drained
50g spring onions, finely sliced
2 tsp capers, roughly chopped
small handful parsley or basil leaves
¼ small red onion, very finely sliced
1 stalk celery, very finely diced
few shavings Parmesan
6 little gem leaves
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

DRESSING
1 tbsp lemon juice
finely grated zest of ½ lemon
1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil


1 / Mix the dressing ingredients in a bowl. Break the tuna up into
    chunks into the bowl, add the remaining ingredients, apart from
    the little gem, and combine gently. Season to taste.
2 / Lay the lettuce leaves on a plate and divide up the bean salad
    evenly.
Caramelised red onion soup
Our take on a French classic. Feel free to blitz it a bit at the end if
you’re after something a little thicker.

// SERVES 2 //
2 large red onions
1 tbsp red wine vinegar
knob unsalted butter
1 tbsp maple syrup
150g button mushrooms, finely sliced
2 sprigs thyme, leaves picked or 1 tsp dried thyme
700ml beef stock
60ml red wine
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 tbsp cornflour, mixed into a paste with 1 tbsp water


1 / Slice the onions into wedges, place in a microwave-proof dish
    with the vinegar, butter and maple syrup and cover and cook on
    high for 7 minutes.
2 / Tip the onions into a large pan and cook over medium-low heat
    for 10 minutes, stirring, until the onions are caramelised. They
    will be very sweet and slightly darker in colour. Add the
    mushrooms and thyme and cook for about 5 minutes, until the
    mushrooms lose their moisture.
3 / Pour in the stock, wine and 250ml water, then bring to the boil.
    Let it boil away for 10–15 minutes.
4 / Stir through the cornflour paste and simmer for a couple of
    minutes to thicken. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
Curried sweet potato & ginger soup
This has such a lovely balance of spice and warmth, with just the
right amount of sweetness. A great lunch for the colder months,
it’s satisfying enough on its own, but as ever with soups a hunk
of bread wouldn’t go amiss.

// SERVES 2–3 //
30g unsalted butter
1 small carrot, finely chopped
1 small onion, finely chopped
thumbnail-sized piece fresh ginger, grated
2 tsp curry powder
500g sweet potatoes, peeled and chopped into small chunks
600ml chicken stock
3 tbsp crème fraîche, plus extra to serve (optional)
squeeze lemon juice, to serve
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Melt the butter in a large pan over medium-low heat. Add the
    carrot and onion, along with a pinch of salt, cover and cook
    gently for 10 minutes, until softened but not browned and sweet.
2 / Add the ginger and curry powder and let them cook for a couple
    of minutes until aromatic. Tip in the sweet potatoes, cover and
    cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally, for 10 minutes.
    Pour in the stock, season with salt and pepper and bring to the
    boil. Simmer for 10 minutes, or until the potatoes are cooked
    through and soft.
3 / Add the crème fraîche and lemon juice, bring back to the boil
    quickly, then remove from the heat.
4 / Use a stick blender to liquidise. Taste and season as needed
    before serving with an extra dollop of crème fraîche, if you like.
Superfood wrap
Roasting the chickpeas gives them the most amazing crunchy
texture. If you are short on time (or feeling a bit lazy) you can
just chuck them in – either way this makes a super tasty and
veg-packed lunch.

// SERVES 2 //
210g tinned chickpeas, drained
2 tsp extra virgin olive oil
1 tsp ground cumin
½ tsp smoked paprika
few pinches ground allspice
pinch dried chilli
1 ripe avocado
juice of ½ lime
2 large wholemeal tortilla wraps
4–6 tenderstem broccoli, steamed
½ carrot, grated
handful watercress or rocket leaves
handful sprouted chia, radish or alfalfa
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

TAHINI DRESSING
2 tbsp tahini
1 tbsp Greek yoghurt
1 tbsp lemon juice
1 tsp olive oil


1 / Preheat the oven to 200°C/Gas 6.
2 / Tip the chickpeas into a baking tray and toss them in the olive
    oil, cumin, paprika, allspice, chilli and season with salt and
    pepper. Roast in the oven for 20–25 minutes until starting to
    crisp. Shake the tray halfway through to prevent the chickpeas
    from catching.
3 / Meanwhile, combine the ingredients for the tahini dressing in a
    bowl and season with salt and pepper. Add 1–2 tablespoons cold
    water, if needed, to make a fluid consistency but not too runny.
4 / Cut the avocado in half and remove the stone. Scoop out the
    flesh, slice into large chunks and toss in a bowl with the lime
    juice. Warm the tortilla wraps according to the packet
    instructions. Pile on the broccoli, grated carrot, watercress,
    sprouts, avocado and the roasted chickpeas. Dollop over the
    dressing and wrap.
Soy sesame chicken & cucumber salad
The flavours of this salad are unbelievably fresh and zingy – it
also makes a great supper too if you’re after something a little
lighter.

// SERVES 2 //
1 tsp rice vinegar
1 tbsp soy sauce
1 tsp sesame oil
2 tbsp honey
1 red chilli, deseeded, plus extra sliced to serve
1 tbsp sesame seeds
juice of 1 lime
2 boneless, skinless chicken breasts
1 cucumber
iceberg or little gem lettuce
coriander leaves, to garnish
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

DRESSING
juice of 1 lime
2 tsp sesame oil
2 tbsp soy sauce


1 / Make the marinade for the chicken by mixing together the rice
    vinegar, soy sauce, sesame oil, honey, chilli, lime juice and
    sesame seeds. Add the chicken breasts, coat all over and leave to
    marinate for at least 1 hour.
2 / When you are ready to cook, preheat a griddle pan over medium-
    high heat.
3 / Add the chicken and grill for about 8 minutes, until nicely
    charred on one side. Flip over and grill the other side until the
    chicken is cooked through.
4 / Remove from the heat and let sit for a moment on a chopping
    board while you prepare the vegetables and dressing.
5 / Mix the ingredients for the dressing together in a small bowl.
    Finely slice the cucumber into thins, if you have a mandoline all
    the better, otherwise just use a sharp knife. Shred the lettuce and
    arrange on plates with the cucumber.
6 / Slice the chicken into pieces and arrange on top of the salad.
    Spoon over the dressing, scatter with extra chilli and the
    coriander leaves and serve.
Soy sesame chicken & cucumber salad
Mexican layer bowl
We’ve already mentioned our love of Mexican food, and this is
another firm favourite. We cannot claim as to its authenticity,
but it is certainly tasty! Don’t be put off by what might seem like
a long list of ingredients – a lot of them overlap for each
component. And when you layer them up and beans meet rice
meets salsa, all crowned with fresh guacamole, it is worth every
second of your time.

// SERVES 2–3 //
250g (about 1½ cups) cooked brown rice or quinoa
small handful coriander, chopped, plus extra for garnish
juice of ½ lime
2 large handfuls shredded cos lettuce
65g feta, crumbled soured cream (optional)

SALSA
1 garlic clove, crushed
½ jalapeño chilli, finely chopped
1–2 tsp salt
¼ tsp ground cumin
juice of ½ lime
2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
3 tomatoes, roughly diced
2 tbsp chopped coriander
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

GUACAMOLE
1 ripe avocado
juice of ½ lime
small handful coriander, finely chopped
1 small tomato, deseeded and diced
1 small garlic clove, finely chopped
¼ red onion, very finely chopped
dash tabasco
½ tsp ground cumin
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

BEANS
2 tbsp coconut oil or olive oil
1 small onion, diced
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
pinch of salt
90g tinned sweetcorn kernels, drained
220g tinned cooked black beans, rinsed and drained
2 medium tomatoes, diced
pinch cayenne
1 tsp dried oregano
2 tbsp tomato purée
small handful coriander, chopped


1 / Make the salsa. Bash the garlic, chilli, salt and cumin in a mortar
    and pestle. Add the lime juice and oil, then season and set aside.
2 / Put the tomatoes in a bowl and pour over the dressing. Mix well
    and add the coriander. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Chill
    for 10 minutes while you get on with the guacamole.
3 / Cut the avocado in half and remove the stone. Scoop the flesh
    into a bowl and mash roughly with the lime juice, coriander,
    tomato, garlic, onion, tabasco and cumin. Season with salt and
    pepper and chill until ready to serve.
4 / Mix the rice or quinoa with the coriander and lime juice. Set
    aside. (You can warm the rice or quinoa but it is equally good
    cold.)
5 / Now prepare the beans. Heat the oil in a pan and fry the onion
    and garlic along with a pinch of salt for 5–6 minutes, until the
    onion is softened but not browned. Add the sweetcorn, black
    beans and tomatoes, and stir well. Add the cayenne, oregano and
    tomato purée. Let the mixture simmer for 10–12 minutes to allow
    the tomatoes to break down.
6 / When you are ready to serve, divide the rice between bowls, top
    each with some lettuce, a couple of scoops of the black bean and
    corn, the salsa, feta and guacamole. Garnish with chopped spring
    onions and coriander, and a good dollop of soured cream, if you
    like.
TIP

This dish is a good opportunity to use up leftover rice, but do make
sure to reheat the rice really thoroughly – you want it hotter than
the sun – as it can be dangerous otherwise. The microwaveable
pouches work well for this.
Easy-peasy sushi
Sushi is such a great lunch option – easy, healthy, high-protein –
and making your own is actually remarkably simple. We use cling
film to make ours which works really well, so don’t worry if you
don’t have a sushi mat. Experiment with your fillings too – as
well as the options below try cooked prawns, baby corn or a little
roast chicken.

// MAKES 36 //
210g short-grain rice or Japanese sushi rice
3 tbsp rice wine vinegar
1½ tbsp unrefined sugar
2 tsp salt
6 nori seaweed sheets
Japanese soy sauce, for dipping

OPTIONAL FILLINGS (CHOOSE FROM ANY)
raw salmon (skin and bones removed) or smoked salmon, cut into strips
avocado, destoned and flesh cut into strips
cucumber, cut into finger-width strips
tinned tuna
white crabmeat
red pepper, cut into strips


1 / Rinse the rice and drain well. Put in a pan with 250ml water and
    bring to the boil. Reduce the heat to low, cover with the lid and
    cook for 12 minutes. Remove from the heat and let it stand for 15
    minutes, without taking off the lid. Meanwhile, heat the rice wine
    vinegar, sugar and salt in a small pan and stir to dissolve. Take
    off the heat and let it cool briefly.
2 / When the rice is done, stir the vinegar-sugar mixture through,
    using a fork. Spread out over a plate and let it sit while you
    prepare the fillings. The rice can be made 48 hours in advance
   and stored in the fridge with clingfilm over it.
3 / Lay a nori sheet on a sheet of clingfilm, shiny side down. Place a
    handful of rice on top and pat it down until the rice covers the
    nori, leaving about a 5cm-wide border.
4 / Lay your chosen fillings, a few strips only, along the bottom edge
    of the rice in a line. Starting with the edge closest to you, roll up
    the clingfilm and nori together as tightly as possible, enclosing
    the filling. Pull out the clingfilm as you roll so that it doesn’t get
    caught in the sushi roll. When you get to the border at the top
    edge, dab the nori with a little water, then roll up to seal. Repeat
    with the remaining nori sheets, rice and fillings.
5 / Chill, join side down, for 15 minutes before serving.
6 / To serve, slice the rolls crosswise into 6 pieces and serve with
    soy sauce for dipping on the side.
Chicken korma soup
This is such a satisfying lunch – warm and filling, make up a
batch on Sunday afternoon and bring the rest in to work. Add a
pouch of microwaveable rice to bulk it up for a hearty supper.

// SERVES 2–3 //
1 tbsp coconut oil
1 medium onion, finely chopped
1½ celery stalks, finely chopped
small bunch coriander, stalks chopped and leaves reserved (optional)
2 garlic cloves
thumbnail-sized piece fresh ginger, grated
½ tsp turmeric
2 tbsp korma curry paste
1 × 400g tin coconut cream
2 handfuls cashew nuts, plus extra to serve
500ml vegetable or chicken stock
2 chicken breast fillets, sliced
handful green beans
natural yoghurt, to serve
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Heat the oil in a pan, add the onion, celery and coriander stalks,
    if using, and cook over medium heat for 10–15 minutes, until
    softened and sweet. Add the garlic, ginger, turmeric and curry
    paste, then continue to cook for another 5 minutes. Pour in the
    coconut cream and add the cashews. Bring to the boil, reduce the
    heat and simmer for 10 minutes.
2 / Use a stick blender to blend the soup to a purée. Drop in the
    chicken slices and beans and simmer gently for 10 minutes until
    the chicken is cooked through. Season to taste with salt and
    pepper.
3 / Serve ladled into soup bowls with a few extra cashew nuts on top
    and some coriander leaves if you like. A swirl of yoghurt to cool
    down the soup also goes down a treat.
LLOYD’S TIP

For a vegetarian version, swap the chicken with cooked chickpeas.
Shake-it-jar salad
This works with pretty much anything; below is our favourite
combination, but you can fill your jar with everything from pasta
and pesto to courgetti and cream cheese – the point (and the fun)
is in the shake.

// SERVES 2 //
¼ medium butternut squash, peeled and cut into 2cm cubes
160g cooked chickpeas (tinned are fine)
4–5 cherry tomatoes
12 olives
100g feta, cubed
little gem lettuce leaves, torn into bite-sized pieces
2 handfuls rocket leaves or watercress
mixed seeds and nuts such as sesame seeds, sunflower or pumpkin seeds, almonds and
walnuts

DRESSING (APPROX. 100ML)
3 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
finely grated zest and juice of ½ lemon
1 tsp agave syrup
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Have two Mason jars ready to fill with your salad ingredients.
2 / Start with the heaviest ingredients and dressing at the bottom so
    the leaves have no chance of getting soggy.
3 / First, prepare the butternut squash by putting in a bowl with
    water to come about 2cm up the sides of the bowl. Steam in the
    microwave for 5–10 minutes, on high, until fork-tender. Drain
    well and allow to cool completely.
4 / Mix together the ingredients for the dressing in a small bowl and
    add about 1–2 tablespoons dressing per jar. (The remaining
   dressing can be saved for other salads.) Divide the chickpeas and
   cherry tomatoes between the jars, then layer with the butternut
   squash cubes followed by the olives. Screw on the lids and pop
   into the fridge until ready to eat. (It will last like this for a couple
   of days in the fridge.)
5 / Just before eating, add the feta cubes, little gem, rocket, seeds
    and nuts, and shake it all up.
MAX’S TIPS

Adding tarragon leaves or basil to the dressing brightens the salad.

Try a mix of cooked beans instead of the chickpeas; black beans or
white beans work especially well. Basically any combination of
fresh vegetables you like can go in this salad – cooked beetroot and
cucumber are excellent additions too.
Shake-it-jar salad
Roast sweet potato & egg salad
A fresh take on two humble classics, the potato salad and egg
salad; this is amazing on its own, and equally good piled high on a
plate of green leaves or on a slice of toasted ciabatta.

// SERVES 4 //
1 tsp coconut oil, for frying
1 medium sweet potato, peeled and cut into 1cm cubes
pinch cayenne
1–2 tsp olive oil
4 lean bacon strips (optional)
6 eggs
2 small shallots, finely chopped
small bunch chives, snipped
1 sprig dill, chopped
1 celery stalk, sliced
3–4 tbsp good-quality mayonnaise
2 tsp white wine vinegar
toasted flaked almonds
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200°C/Gas 6.
2 / Scatter the sweet potato on a baking tray and toss with the
    cayenne, salt and pepper. Drizzle with the oil. Cover with foil and
    bake for 20 minutes. Take off the foil and return to the oven to
    bake for a further 15 minutes, or until soft and golden at the
    edges. Allow to cool.
3 / If using bacon, place on a baking tray lined with baking
    parchment and bake in the oven for 10–12 minutes, until crisp.
4 / Put the eggs in a pan with fresh water to cover. Bring to the boil
    over high heat, reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 4–5
    minutes. Take off the heat and rinse under cold, running water to
  stop the eggs from cooking further. Peel them as soon as they are
  cold enough to handle.
5 / Roughly cut the eggs into quarters and put them in a bowl.
    Combine with the shallots, chives, dill and celery, and tear the
    bacon into pieces, if using. Add the sweet potato, mayonnaise
    and vinegar, and fold everything together gently so as not to
    break the eggs up too much. Season to taste with salt and pepper
    and serve with the flaked almonds scattered on top.
Salmon & quinoa bites
These are equally good cold too. And don’t be afraid to use good-
quality tinned salmon if you are pressed for time, or tuna. For a
more substantial meal, try serving them with a poached or fried
egg.

// MAKES 20 //
200g cooked red, white or mixed quinoa
220g cooked skinless salmon fillet, roughly flaked
½ red onion, finely chopped
1 plump garlic clove, finely crushed to a paste
small bunch dill, finely chopped
finely grated zest of 1 lemon
2 tbsp oat flour or ground almonds
2 eggs
4 tbsp coarse polenta
1 tbsp coconut oil or olive oil
lemon wedges, to serve
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

DILL YOGHURT
60g Greek yoghurt
½ garlic clove, crushed to a paste
1 dill sprig, finely chopped


1 / Put the quinoa, salmon, onion, garlic, dill, lemon zest, oat flour
    or ground almonds in a bowl. Mix well and season with salt and
    pepper. Beat the eggs and add to the bowl too, then mix again.
    Divide the mixture up and roll into golfballs. Squash lightly into
    a small cake. If you have time, chill the cakes for 15–20 minutes
    to help them firm up.
2 / Mix the yoghurt with the garlic, 1 tablespoon cold water and the
    dill. Season to taste.
3 / When you are ready to cook, put the polenta on a plate and
    season with salt and pepper. Transfer the fishcakes to the plate
    with the polenta and pat all over.
4 / Heat the oil in a frying pan over medium heat. Add the fishcakes,
    a few at the time, and fry for about 8 minutes, letting the bottom
    form a nice crust, turning until the coating is crisp and brown
    and the cakes are piping hot in the middle.
5 / Serve immediately with the yoghurt, lemon wedges for squeezing
    and some crisp green leaves.
Cheesy cauliflower fritters
Cauliflower cheese in fritter form, these taste indulgent but are
actually remarkably light. The sharpness of the dijon mustard
cuts through the cheese, and paired with some peppery rocket
they make a great lunch.

// MAKES 10–12 //
560g cauliflower florets, cut into small 1cm pieces
2 eggs
90g plain flour
110g mature Cheddar cheese, grated
1 tbsp Dijon mustard
generous pinch cayenne
splash or 2 of milk
1 tbsp olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
Greek yoghurt or soured cream, to serve


1 / Bring a pan of water to the boil and blanch the cauliflower for 5–
    6 minutes, until tender to bite. Drain well and set aside.
2 / Beat the eggs in a large bowl, add the flour, cheese, mustard and
    cayenne and season with salt and pepper. Add a splash of milk to
    loosen the batter. Check the mixture for seasoning by frying up a
    small amount in a pan, then adjusting the seasoning to taste. Add
    the cauliflower pieces to the batter.
3 / Heat the oil in a frying pan over medium-high heat. Add
    tablespoonfuls of the batter, reduce the heat to medium and cook
    the fritters for 3–4 minutes until golden brown. (You may need to
    cook them in batches to prevent overcrowding the pan.) Only flip
    over once a nice crust has formed, then cook the other side until
    golden. Remove to kitchen paper to drain.
4 / Serve hot, with soured cream or yoghurt on the side.
MAX’S TIP:

To make a super-quick relish to go on the side, halve some cherry
tomatoes, add some finely chopped red onion, chives and a squeeze
of lemon.
Cheesy cauliflower fritters
Coronation chicken
Created in the 1950s this is proper retro, and you’d be forgiven if
the very name conjures up thoughts of old school black forest
gateau and cheese cubes served on sticks. But the mix of mayo
and yoghurt keeps this light, and it is a great way to use up
leftover roast-chicken (see here). Pile on some salad leaves, scoop
up with wholegrain toast or stuff into some pitta – you really
can’t go wrong!

// SERVES 2 //
80g good-quality mayonnaise
80g natural yoghurt
1 tbsp mango chutney
2–3 tsp Madras curry powder, to taste
1 tsp Worcestershire sauce
1 celery stalk, sliced
2 leftover cold, cooked chicken breasts (about 200g), shredded into bite-sized pieces
25g fresh grapes, halved (or use raisins)
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

TO SERVE
small bunch coriander, roughly chopped
lemon wedges
2 tbsp toasted flaked almonds


1 / In a bowl, combine the mayonnaise, yoghurt, chutney, curry
    powder and Worcestershire sauce. Season to taste. Add the
    celery, chicken and grapes, and gently fold together.
2 / Put in the fridge for at least 2 hours for the flavours to come
    together.
3 / Just before serving, fold through most of the coriander. Serve
    with a few lemon wedges for squeezing and the toasted almonds
    and remaining coriander sprinkled over the top.
Roast vegetables & Brazil nut pesto



This is a great recipe to use up whatever veg you have leftover in
your fridge – just vary the cooking times accordingly. The pesto is
amazing without having to add the parmesan (the nuts add
thickness and texture) so leave it out if you want to keep things
vegan. Great on its own as a light lunch, the veggies and pesto
are awesome stirred through some quinoa or pasta shapes too.

// SERVES 4 //
1 small aubergine, diced into 2cm chunks
1 courgette, sliced into 2cm slices and cut into half-moons
1 red pepper, cut into quarters lengthwise, then halved widthwise
1 yellow pepper, cut into quarters lengthwise, then halved widthwise
¼ butternut squash, cut into 1cm cubes (no need to peel)
1 red onion, peeled and chopped into 6 wedges
4 whole garlic cloves (unpeeled)
generous glug olive oil
2 tbsp balsamic vinegar
1 large handful cherry tomatoes
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

BRAZIL NUT PESTO
50g fresh basil leaves
20g Brazil nuts, roughly chopped
1 garlic clove, roughly chopped
20g Parmesan cheese, finely grated (optional)
zest of ½ lemon
4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
1 tbsp lemon juice
1 / Preheat the oven to 190ºC/Gas 5.
2 / Put all the prepared vegetables (except the cherry tomatoes) and
    garlic cloves into a large baking tray and drizzle with plenty of
    olive oil and the balsamic vinegar. Season well with salt and
    pepper.
3 / Put the tray in the oven and roast for 20 minutes. Remove from
    the oven and stir everything around. Add the cherry tomatoes,
    stir briefly again to coat them in the oil and return to the oven
    for a further 15–20 minutes, until all the vegetables are tender
    and beginning to brown.
4 / Meanwhile, make the pesto. Put all the ingredients into the small
    bowl of a food processor or a mini chopper and blitz to form a
    smooth pesto. Taste and season with salt and pepper.
5 / Once the veg are cooked, squeeze the garlic flesh out of the skins
    and stir it through the rest of the vegetables. Serve the roasted
    vegetables with the pesto to spoon over.
Moroccan pizza



This is one of our favourite inventions. It might sound a little out
there, but trust us on this – it is so moreish and the combination
of slightly sweet (cinnamon) and savoury (tahini and garlic) really
hits the spot. Steeping the red onions in lemon juice and hot
water takes away the bitterness and turns them the most
amazingly vibrant colour.

// SERVES 2 //
¼ cauliflower head, broken into florets
2 garlic cloves, crushed
200g tinned chickpeas, rinsed and drained
1 tsp smoked paprika
2 tsp ground cumin
1 tbsp olive oil
1 sweet potato, peeled and cut into small cubes
2 tbsp almond milk
pinch ground cinnamon
½ red onion, thinly sliced
juice of ½ lemon
2 large wholemeal tortilla wraps
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

TAHINI SAUCE
60ml tahini
1 garlic clove, finely crushed
juice of 1 lemon


1 / Preheat the oven to 200°C/Gas 6.
2 / Scatter the cauliflower florets in a baking tray. Toss with the
    garlic, chickpeas, paprika, cumin and olive oil. Season with salt
    and pepper, then roast in the oven for 25–30 minutes, or until the
    cauliflower is golden brown.
3 / Meanwhile, put the sweet potato in a pan and cover with water.
    Bring to the boil and simmer until fork-tender. Remove from the
    heat, drain and return the sweet potato to the pan. Add the milk,
    cinnamon and season to taste. Mash until smooth and combined,
    adding a splash more milk if needed. Set aside.
4 / Put the red onion in a bowl with the lemon juice and let steep for
    10 minutes.
5 / Mix the tahini with the garlic and lemon juice, and add 2–3
    tablespoons warm water to make a fluid sauce. Season to taste.
6 / When ready to serve, take the tortilla wraps and spread them
    generously with the sweet potato mash. Top with the cauliflower
    and chickpeas. Drain the onions and sprinkle over the top. Serve
    drizzled with tahini sauce.
Moroccan pizza
Chilli no-carne



Don’t be put off by the list of ingredients here – it might seem
long, but most will either be things you have to hand in your
store cupboard already, or will be worth buying for the future
(see our note on Stocking Up, here). You’d never guess that there
wasn’t meat in this dish, and it makes the perfect meal to serve
for vegans, veggies and die-hard carnivores alike.

// SERVES 4 //
1 tbsp coconut oil, for frying
1 large onion, finely chopped
3 garlic cloves, finely chopped
3 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp ground allspice
2 tsp smoked paprika
1 cinnamon stick or 2 tsp ground cinnamon
2 bay leaves
1 tbsp chopped fresh oregano or 2 tsp dried oregano
1 medium courgette, diced
170g brown mushrooms, cut into slightly larger dice than the courgette
1 ancho chilli in sauce or 1 red chilli, split in half lengthways and deseeded
1 × 400g tin chopped tomatoes
1 tbsp cider or balsamic vinegar
1 tbsp maple syrup
1 tbsp tomato ketchup
50g dark chocolate (at least 70 per cent cocoa solids), roughly chopped
370ml vegetable stock
1 × 400g tin borlotti beans or black beans, rinsed and drained
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 / Heat the oil in a large casserole pan, add the onion and a pinch of
    salt. Allow to cook over low heat, covered, for 10 minutes,
    stirring occasionally, until softened but not brown.
2 / Add the garlic along with the spices, bay leaves and oregano. Stir
    for 2 minutes, to let the spices become aromatic, then add the
    courgette. Cook for 5 minutes, until slightly softened, then add
    the mushrooms and fry for 5 more minutes until browned.
3 / Add the chilli, tomatoes, vinegar, maple syrup, ketchup and
    chocolate. Bring to the boil, stirring to melt the chocolate,
4 / Add the vegetable stock and beans, and bring back to the boil.
    Lower the heat to a simmer, season with salt and pepper,
    partially cover with a lid, then allow to cook for 40–50 minutes,
    until the courgette is tender.
5 / Serve in bowls over rice or in tortillas, with your choice of
    garnishes.
TO SERVE

cooked brown rice or soft tortillas / avocado slices shredded
cabbage sliced radishes coriander leaves lime wedges
Pumpkin & cauliflower curry



The yearly Halloween dilemma… what to do with the leftover
innards of your lantern masterpiece? Well panic no more because
this is a great option – warming and spicy, serve on its own or
with some brown basmati rice and naan.

// SERVES 4–6 //
2 tbsp rapeseed or olive oil
1 large onion, finely chopped
2 large garlic cloves, finely chopped
½ red chilli, finely chopped
1 tbsp ground coriander
2 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp garam masala
400ml vegetable stock
1 x 400ml tin coconut milk
1 x 400g tin chopped tomatoes
½ pumpkin or 1 small butternut squash, peeled and cut into 2cm chunks (about 600g total
weight)
1 small head cauliflower, chopped into large florets
150g red lentils
200g spinach
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Heat the oil in a large pan and cook the onion over a low–medium
    heat for about 8 minutes, until softened and translucent. Add the
    garlic, chilli and spices and cook for another 2 minutes.
2 / Pour in the vegetable stock, coconut milk and the tinned
    tomatoes and add the pumpkin or butternut chunks. Bring to the
    boil, then let it bubble away for 15 minutes.
3 / Add the cauliflower florets and lentils and simmer for a further
    10–15 minutes, until the cauliflower and pumpkin are cooked and
    the lentils have absorbed most of the excess to liquid to create a
    rich, thick sauce.
4 / Take the pan off the heat and stir through the spinach – there’s
    no need to cook this as it will wilt in the heat of the curry. Season
    really well with salt and pepper and serve.
The best vegan burger



We promised you no BS in this book, so when we say the best
vegan burger we mean the best. Easily doubled, these are great
cooked on the BBQ, baked in the oven or on the hob. The celeriac
slaw is a revelation too, and if you can’t find a celeriac, red or
white cabbage work equally well.

// SERVES 2 //

THE BURGER
3 spring onions
1 red pepper, roughly chopped
4 garlic cloves
1 tsp smoked paprika
2 tsp ground cumin
1 tsp salt
handful cashews
handful pumpkin seeds
1 x 400g tin butter beans or haricot beans, rinsed and drained
1 tsp olive oil
freshly ground black pepper

CELERIAC SLAW
½ celeriac, grated
1 tbsp coconut yoghurt
1 tsp tamari
1 tbsp sesame oil
zest and juice of ½ lime

TO SERVE
2 soft vegan burger buns
lettuce or rocket leaves
lettuce or rocket leaves
sliced gherkins
sliced tomato


1 / Put the spring onions, pepper and garlic in a food processor and
    blend until chopped. Add the paprika, cumin, salt, cashews and
    seeds and pulse-blend until the mixture becomes the texture of
    breadcrumbs. Transfer to a bowl.
2 / Put the beans and oil in the food processor, and pulse with 2
    teaspoons of cold water until smooth. Mix this into the nut and
    pepper mixture. Season to taste with salt and pepper.
3 / Roll the mix into large patties and chill in the fridge for at least
    10 minutes.
4 / Meanwhile, make the slaw by mixing the ingredients together.
    Season to taste.
5 / To cook the burgers, heat a large pan over medium heat. Fry the
    burgers for 8 minutes on each side, or until golden and hot all the
    way through.
6 / Split the burger buns and add the slaw, lettuce, gherkins, tomato
    and a burger. Add the bun top and serve.
The best vegan burger
Marinated tofu stir-fry



You might already be converted to tofu, still on the fence, or have
no idea how to even say it; hopefully this dish might be the one
to convert you! Tofu is pretty bland on its own but acts like a
sponge to soak up flavours, making it particularly delicious in
dishes that use tamari or soy sauce, as this one does; marinating
is definitely worth the effort here.

// SERVES 2 //
2 tbsp sunflower oil
3 tbsp soy sauce
2 tbsp rice wine
2 tbsp fish sauce
1 x 200g block firm tofu, cut into 2.5cm cubes
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
thumb-sized piece ginger, peeled and sliced into fine matchsticks
1 small aubergine, cubed
100g baby corn
100g sugar snap peas
1 small red chilli, deseeded and sliced
large pinch ground white pepper
brown rice, to serve
handful coriander, chopped
black sesame seeds, to garnish (optional)
sea salt


1 / Whisk 1 tablespoon each of the soy sauce, rice wine and fish
    sauce and pour over the tofu cubes. Leave to marinate for 30
    minutes to an hour; while marinating preheat your oven to
    200°C/Gas 6. When you are ready, cover the tofu in some foil and
   bake in the oven for 20 minutes, turning occasionally.
2 / Heat the oil in a frying pan or wok. Add the garlic and ginger to
    the pan and fry for 2 minutes, until aromatic. Add the aubergine
    and stir-fry for 4–5 minutes, until slightly browned. Add the
    corn, sugar snap peas, chilli, remaining soy sauce, rice wine and
    fish sauce, and stir-fry for 3 more minutes. Add 2 tablespoons of
    water and continue to stir-fry until the water has evaporated.
    Add the pepper, season with extra salt to taste if needed.
3 / Serve over freshly cooked brown rice, scattered with coriander
    leaves and black sesame seeds, if using.
Marinated tofu stir-fry
Beef ramen
Full of vibrant flavours and a real chilli kick, this is such a
comforting dish and perfect for when you’re feeling a little under
the weather. Feel free to swap the beef for chicken, tofu or
prawns, or the rice noodles for egg noodles if that’s what you
have to hand.

// SERVES 4 //
3 garlic cloves, roughly chopped
2.5cm piece ginger, peeled and chopped, plus 2 extra large slices
250g beef sirloin or rump steaks (frying steaks are best)
1 long red chilli
4 tbsp soy sauce
2 tbsp sesame oil
1 tbsp rice wine vinegar or white vinegar
1½ tsp brown sugar
2 eggs
125g baby corn
2 spring onions, sliced
1.5 litres beef or chicken stock
3 tbsp fish sauce
250g rice noodles
coriander leaves, to garnish
white and black sesame seeds, to garnish
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Put the garlic and ginger in a food processor and blitz to a fine
    paste. Tip into a bowl and combine with the beef, chilli and 2
    tablespoons of the soy sauce. Add 1 tablespoon of the sesame oil,
    the vinegar and sugar and leave to marinate for 30 minutes.
2 / Put the eggs in a pan and cover with cold water. Bring to the boil
    and simmer for 4 minutes, drain and run under cold water. Peel
    as soon as the eggs are cool enough to handle and set aside.
3 / Heat a pan over high heat and sear the beef for 2–3 minutes each
    side, until cooked to your liking. Take off the heat and slice up.
4 / In a large, deep pan, heat the remaining sesame oil and fry the
    corn, spring onions and sliced ginger over high heat for 2–3
    minutes. Add the stock and bring to the boil. Add the remaining
    soy and fish sauce, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Add
    the noodles and simmer for 4–5 minutes, until the noodles are
    cooked.
5 / Ladle the soup and noodles between bowls and serve with the
    beef and half an egg on top. Finally, garnish with coriander
    leaves and sesame seeds, and serve.
Beef ramen
Pesto salmon parcels
This is a great way to use up any leftover Brazil nut pesto (here),
or you can make the classic version here. That said if you do go
for shop-bought stuff we won’t hold it against you (for long…).
The focus here is on the perfectly cooked salmon; for what is a
very simple dish to put together it is surprisingly elegant.

// SERVES 2 //
2 × 150g salmon fillets
zest of ½ lemon
2 pinches dried chilli flakes
4–6 tenderstem broccoli stems
extra virgin olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

BASIL PINE NUT PESTO
2 handfuls basil leaves
2 tbsp pine nuts
1 garlic clove, roughly chopped
50–70ml olive oil
30g pecorino or Parmesan, finely grated


1 / Preheat the oven to 200°C/Gas 6. Make the pesto by blitzing the
    ingredients in a mini food processor, adding enough oil to get a
    nice pourable consistency. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
2 / Season the salmon fillets with salt and pepper. Cut two large
    squares of foil (about 50cm). Place one piece of salmon on each
    foil square. Grate over the lemon zest, sprinkle with chilli flakes
    and dollop on a couple of spoonfuls of the pesto.
3 / Add two or three stems of broccoli to the side, drizzle with a
    little olive oil and lift the edges of the foil up to wrap into a loose
    parcel, leaving some space for the ingredients to steam, and
    making sure that it is well sealed.
4 / Bake in the oven for 15–20 minutes. Carefully unravel one of the
    parcels to check the fattest part of the salmon; if it is pale pink
    all the way through it is done. If not, return to the oven for a
    further 5 minutes and check again.
Chicken enchiladas
An awesome dish to make if you have friends coming over,
enchiladas win every time. If you can’t get your hands on the
chipotles you can always use a normal red chilli, and if you’re
after a veggie version swap the chicken for some sweet potato,
courgette and mushrooms. A margarita wouldn’t go amiss either!

// SERVES 4 //
2 tbsp oil
3 boneless chicken breasts, cut into 2cm chunks
1 red onion, finely chopped
2 garlic cloves
1 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp ground coriander
pinch cayenne pepper
1 tsp paprika
1–2 tinned chipotles in adobo, chopped
1 x 400g tin tomatoes
1 tbsp tomato purée
150ml stock or water
juice of ½ lime
8 corn tortillas
1 red pepper, deseeded and thinly sliced
65g grated mozzarella, plus extra to sprinkle
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

TO SERVE
soured cream
guacamole or avocado slices


1 / Preheat the oven to 190°C/Gas 5.
2 / Heat half the oil in a large pan and brown the chicken over
    medium-high heat all over. Remove from the pan and set aside.
3 / Add the remaining oil and fry the onions for 10 minutes, until
    translucent and soft. Stir in the garlic for 2 minutes, then add the
    spices and cook for another minute. Stir in the chipotles,
    tomatoes, tomato purée and stock and simmer, uncovered, for
    15–20 minutes until slightly reduced. Add the lime juice and
    season well to taste.
4 / Grease a baking dish with a little oil. Take one tortilla and add
    some of the chicken pieces, a few slices of pepper and a bit of
    cheese. Roll firmly and place, seam side down, in the dish.
    Repeat with the remaining tortillas and filling.
5 / Pour the tomato sauce over the top and sprinkle with extra
    grated cheese.
6 / Bake for 35–40 minutes, until the cheese is bubbling and nicely
    melted. Serve with soured cream and guacamole or slices of
    avocado.
Spicy lamb meatballs
This is such a versatile dish – great with pasta or rice, you can
also swap the Parmesan for some feta, as we’ve done here, or the
lamb for turkey. Our favourite way to serve this is with polenta
wedges, using the ready-made packs that you can get in
supermarkets; simply slice and fry or bake until golden.

// SERVES 4 //
2 tbsp olive oil, plus extra to drizzle
1 small onion, thinly sliced
4 garlic cloves, sliced
400g tinned tomatoes
1 tbsp tomato purée
½ small red chilli, deseeded and finely sliced
sprig rosemary, leaves picked and thinly chopped
120ml chicken stock
finely grated Parmesan, to garnish
salad leaves, to serve (optional)

MEATBALLS
300g minced lamb
250g pork sausage meat, from about 3 sausages
1½ tsp fennel seeds
1 egg, beaten
pinch dried chilli flakes
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 220°C/Gas 7.
2 / Make the sauce by heating the oil in a pan over medium-high
    heat. Add the onion and cook for 7–10 minutes, until softened.
    Add the garlic and cook for 1 minute, until slightly golden, then
    tip in the tomatoes. Stir in the tomato purée, chilli, rosemary and
    chicken stock, then bring to the boil. Reduce the heat and simmer
    for 15–20 minutes.
3 / To make the meatballs, line a baking tray with baking
    parchment. In a large bowl, combine all the ingredients and
    shape the mixture into golfball-sized meatballs. Arrange on the
    tray and drizzle with a little oil. (If you want to check the
    seasoning of the meat, before rolling them into balls, fry up a
    small amount in a pan and adjust the seasoning to taste.)
4 / Bake the meatballs in the oven for 20–25 minutes, until browned.
5 / Topple the meatballs into the sauce, and simmer over low heat
    for 5 minutes. Serve the meatballs with a few gratings of
    Parmesan together with the tomato sauce and some salad on the
    side. Alternatively serve the tomato sauce on the side as more of
    a dip. This is also great served with spaghetti.
Spicy lamb meatballs
Satay prawn dippers
This is our take on a takeaway classic: fresher, lighter and less
sugary than what often turns up in a plastic tray. Add some
steamed rice if you’re in need of a little more sustenance, or
alternatively serve as a help-yourself starter if you’re having
people over. If you have any leftover satay sauce thin it down
with a little more lime juice and use like a dressing for a big
green salad.

// MAKES 6 SKEWERS //
1 tbsp olive oil
juice of 1 lime
1½ tbsp fish sauce
1 red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped
thumb-sized piece ginger, finely chopped
3 garlic cloves, finely chopped
½ tsp ground turmeric
24 raw tiger prawns, peeled
2 tsp honey

SATAY SAUCE
2 tbsp coconut or peanut oil
2 shallots or ½ small onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, finely chopped
1cm piece ginger, finely chopped
2 tbsp soy sauce
2 heaped tbsp crunchy peanut butter
200ml coconut cream
juice of ½ lime

QUICK ASIAN SLAW
2 tbsp soy sauce
juice of ½ lime
1 tbsp sesame oil
½ head red cabbage, shredded
2 medium carrots, grated
handful fresh coriander, leaves picked and chopped
1 tbsp sesame seeds


1 / Whisk the olive oil, lime juice and fish sauce with the chilli,
    ginger, garlic and turmeric. Add the prawns and honey and stir
    well. Cover with clingfilm and marinate for 30 minutes.
2 / Meanwhile, make the satay sauce. Heat the oil in a pan and fry
    the shallots or onion, garlic and ginger until softened. Add the
    soy sauce, peanut butter and coconut cream. Stir in the lime juice
    and soy sauce, adding more, if needed, to taste.
3 / Assemble the quick Asian slaw. Whisk together the soy sauce,
    lime juice and sesame oil in a large bowl. Add the red cabbage,
    carrots, coriander and sesame seeds and toss to coat with the
    dressing; set aside.
4 / To cook the prawns, heat a griddle pan over high heat until very
    hot. Thread 4 prawns onto each skewer and cook for 3 minutes
    per side, or until the prawns are pink and opaque. Serve with the
    Asian slaw and the satay sauce for dipping.
Satay prawn dippers
Stuffed butternut squash
The colours of this are amazing and so uplifting when made on a
chilly autumn evening; this is stuffed squash as it should be. You
can swap the rice for quinoa or even some fried lamb mince, but
we have to say the straight-up veggie version is our favourite.

// SERVES 2 //
1 medium butternut squash
1 tbsp olive oil, plus extra for rubbing
100g basmati and wild rice
1 tsp sumac
1 garlic clove, crushed
6 spring onions
zest of ½ lemon
½ small bunch (25g) flat-leaf parsley, chopped
100g feta cheese
2–3 tbsp pomegranate seeds
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
green salad, to serve


1 / Preheat the oven to 190ºC/Gas 5.
2 / Slice the butternut in half and rub oil and salt and pepper all
    over it. Place the two halves in a baking tray, cut side down, and
    roast in the oven for 30 minutes.
3 / Meanwhile, put the rice in a saucepan and cover with twice the
    volume of water. Put the lid on the pan and cook over medium
    heat for 20 minutes, until the rice is tender and the water has all
    been absorbed. Set aside.
4 / Once the butternut has been cooking for 30 minutes, remove from
    the oven and turn the halves over. Sprinkle half the sumac over
    each half and return to the oven for another 15 minutes, or until
    the flesh has cooked through. Check by inserting a knife into the
   thickest part of the squash; if there is still resistance, return to
   the oven until it is cooked throughout.
5 / Heat the tablespoon of olive oil in a frying pan and cook the
    garlic and spring onions gently for a few minutes. Add the rice,
    lemon zest and most of the parsley and stir everything together.
    Crumble in about half of the feta and season well with salt and
    pepper.
6 / Remove the squash from the oven again and fill the holes with
    the rice stuffing. Crumble the remaining feta over the top of the
    rice and return to the oven for about 10 minutes, until the feta
    has melted.
7 / Sprinkle the squash with the reserved parsley and pomegranate
    seeds and serve with a green salad.
Stuffed butternut squash
Quinoa & mushroom ‘risotto’
We are not claiming this as an authentic Italian risotto, but it is
certainly delicious. The quinoa gives a great texture and extra
nutrition boost, while mixing it with the rice keeps the dish
affordable. Easily doubled, swap the chicken stock for veggie and
use a vegetarian Parmesan if you want to make it meat-free.

// SERVES 2 //
25g dried porcini mushrooms
1 tbsp plus 2 tsp coconut oil
3 garlic cloves, finely chopped
150g chestnut mushrooms (or mixed), sliced
1 onion, finely chopped
70g quinoa
80g risotto rice
1 glass white wine
600–750ml hot chicken stock
zest of ½ lemon
25g Parmesan, grated
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
handful flat-leaf parsley leaves, to serve


1 / Soak the dried mushrooms in 3 tablespoons of boiling water for
    10 minutes.
2 / Heat 1 teaspoon of oil in a large frying pan and add half the
    garlic. Squeeze the mushrooms dry, reserving the liquid in the
    bowl, and add these to the pan. Let the mushrooms cook for 3–4
    minutes, then add the reserved mushroom-soaking liquid. Bubble
    on high for 2–3 minutes, to reduce slightly, then put the mix into
    a bowl.
3 / Add another teaspoon of oil to the pan and fry the sliced
    mushrooms over high heat, to brown them. Season with salt and
    pepper and remove to the bowl with the porcini mushrooms. Set
   aside
4 / Heat the remaining oil in the same pan over medium heat. Add
    the onion and remaining garlic, and cook for 10–15 minutes, until
    soft and translucent. Add the quinoa and rice, stirring to coat in
    the oil.
5 / Turn up the heat to medium-high and pour in the wine. Let it
    bubble away for a few minutes, until the grains absorb the wine.
    Add one ladleful of the hot stock and stir through, letting the rice
    and quinoa absorb the liquid almost completely, before adding
    another ladle of stock. Continue to do this for 20–30 minutes,
    until the rice and quinoa are just tender to bite.
6 / Next, stir in the mushrooms along with the juices in the bowl and
    heat through for 5 minutes. Finally, add the lemon zest, season to
    taste and stir through the Parmesan. Garnish with parsley and
    serve.
Beef tagine
We are big fans of any dish that makes the most of inexpensive
cuts of meat; braising beef takes longer to cook but it is definitely
worth it, and actually sometimes taking your time over a slow-
cook one-pot is a lot more enjoyable (not to mention relaxing)
than manically chucking things in a frying pan on a 30-second
timer. This freezes really well too, so double up and you’ll be
smug in the knowledge that you’ve got a hearty meal ready for
you when you need it.

// SERVES 4 //
rapeseed or olive oil, for frying
1 large onion, finely chopped
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
500g braising beef, diced into chunky pieces
700g passata
1 beef jelly stock cube dissolved in 300ml hot water
3 tbsp harissa paste
1 x 400g tin chickpeas, rinsed and drained
200g stoned prunes, chopped in half
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
couscous, to serve
chopped parsley, to sprinkle


1 / Heat a little oil in a large casserole dish and fry the onion and
    garlic for 6–7 minutes over low–medium heat, until the onions
    are softened and translucent.
2 / Add the beef and fry for another 2–3 minutes until the beef is
    browned all over, then add the passata and beef stock. Stir
    through the harissa and bring the mixture to the boil. Reduce the
    heat to low and pop a lid on the pan. Cook for 1½ hours, until the
    meat is really tender, stirring from time to time.
3 / Remove the lid and cook for a further 30 minutes to reduce and
    thicken the liquid. Add the chickpeas and prunes to the mixture
    and cook for a further 5–10 minutes to warm them through; you
    should now have a really deep-brown, rich sauce.
4 / Season really well with salt and pepper and serve with couscous
    and a little chopped parsley sprinkled over the top.
The Inside-out burger
Inside-out, outside-in – whichever way you look at it these
burgers are the bomb. Feel free to experiment with the filling –
blue cheese and a little chopped bacon, red onion jam and goat’s
cheese… endless opportunities! You can also make little mini
ones and pretend you’re a giant :-)

// SERVES 2 //
300g minced beef
handful breadcrumbs
2 tsp chopped thyme
2 dashes Worcestershire sauce
150g spinach leaves
4 tbsp coarsely grated mozzarella cheese
2–3 jarred roasted red peppers, finely sliced
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
oil, for frying

TO SERVE
2 brioche burger buns or 4 mini buns
gherkins, sliced
1 avocado, destoned and sliced
tomato sauce and/or mustard sauce


1 / In a large bowl, combine the mince, breadcrumbs, thyme and
    Worcestershire sauce and season with salt and pepper. Divide
    the mixture into 4 large balls and place on a tray lined with
    parchment paper. Chill in the fridge for 30 minutes.
2 / Meanwhile, blanch the spinach in a pan of boiling water for 1
    minute. Drain and rinse under cold running water. When cool,
    use your hands to squeeze as much moisture out of the spinach
    as possible. You won’t be left with much spinach but you don’t
    need much for the burgers!
3 / Remove the burgers from the fridge and flatten each one out into
    a 1cm patty, roughly. Put about half of the mozzarella on one
    patty, followed by a few pieces of red pepper and a little bit of
    spinach. Take another patty and place on top to sandwich the
    two together, then squeeze the edges to seal and enclose the
    fillings. Repeat with the remaining patties.
4 / Heat the oil in a frying pan over medium–high heat. Add the
    burgers. You may want to do this one at a time depending on how
    large your pan is. Fry for 6–8 minutes on each side over medium
    heat or until cooked to your preference.
5 / Take off the heat and drain on kitchen paper.
6 / As these are cooking, grill your buns on the cut sides. Serve the
    burgers on a toasted bun half and top with gherkins, avocado
    slices and tomato sauce or whichever condiments you like.
The Inside-out burger
Burger with wings & lemon ‘mayo’
The third and final of our burger recipes, because we like to
cater for all tastes; bashing the chicken flat makes it quick and
easy to cook, as well being a good stress-reliever. We’re calling it
a ‘mayo’, but feel free to go with aioli if you prefer.

// SERVES 4 //
4 chicken breasts (about 150g each)
1–2 tbsp olive oil
4 large wholemeal rolls
2 beef tomatoes, thickly sliced
½ cos lettuce, leaves ripped in half
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

SWEET POTATO WEDGES:
800g sweet potatoes
30g coconut oil
1 tbsp paprika
sprinkle flaky sea salt

LEMON ‘MAYO’
200g Greek yoghurt
zest of 1 lemon
1 garlic clove, finely grated
1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200ºC/Gas 6.
2 / Start with the wedges, as they will take the longest to cook. Slice
    the sweet potatoes into wedges lengthwise, leaving the skins on.
    Melt the coconut oil in a small saucepan, then mix in the paprika.
    Tip the wedges into a large baking tray and pour over the
    paprika oil. Mix together so that the wedges are coated all over,
    then sprinkle with a generous pinch of flaky salt. Bake for 15
   minutes, then take them out and turn them all over and return to
   the oven for a further 10–15 minutes, until they are crisp on the
   outside and turning brown.
3 / Meanwhile, put the chicken breasts between two sheets of
    clingfilm and use a rolling pin (or a pan!) to bash them to a
    thickness of about 5mm. Season them with salt and pepper.
4 / Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a large non-stick frying pan over high
    heat. Place two of the chicken fillets into the pan (you could
    always get another pan going to cook them all at once, rather
    than cook them in two batches). Cook for 2–3 minutes on the first
    side, then turn them over and cook for a further 1–2 minutes on
    the second side, until browned on both sides and cooked through.
    Repeat with the remaining two fillets.
5 / To make the ‘mayo’, mix all the ingredients together in a small
    bowl and season with salt and pepper.
6 / Slice the rolls in half and lay a slice or two of tomato on the base
    of each roll. Top with a layer of lettuce leaves and place the
    chicken breasts on top of that. Finish by smothering the top of
    the chicken with a quarter of the lemon ‘mayo’, and replacing the
    top of the roll.
7 / Serve the burgers with the sweet potato wedges.
Crispy cod with aubergine fries
Our health-ified fish and chips. To keeps things even lighter you
can bake the fish in the oven, alongside the aubergine fries. It’s
worth patting any excess oil from the aubergine too as they are a
very porous vegetable, and tend to soak up everything they
touch. For the crushed peas simply bring some petit pois to the
boil, drain and give them a good mash with a fork.

// SERVES 2 //
200g fish fillet, such as cod (or use hake, pollock or haddock)
75g rice flour or plain white flour
pinch cayenne pepper
1 egg
80g panko breadcrumbs (or use sourdough or brioche breadcrumbs)
groundnut oil, for shallow frying
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
lemon wedges, to serve
crushed peas, to serve

AUBERGINE FRIES
1 small aubergine
1 tsp chopped thyme
½ tsp smoked paprika
1 tbsp coconut oil or olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 210°C/Gas 7.
2 / Slice the aubergine in half and then into 1cm wedges. Sprinkle
    with salt and leave to sit in a colander for 10 minutes. Pat dry
    and combine the aubergine in a bowl with the thyme, paprika, oil
    and seasoning. Tip into a roasting tin, laying the aubergine
    wedges out into a single layer. Bake in the oven for 15–20
    minutes, turning the pieces halfway through.
3 / For the fish, slice the fillet into roughly 6 pieces and pat dry with
    kitchen paper.
4 / Put the flour into one bowl, season with cayenne and salt and
    pepper. Beat the egg in a second bowl and then tip the
    breadcrumbs into a third bowl.
5 / Take one piece of fish and press it into the flour, coating both
    sides. Shake off any excess, then dip it into the egg and coat
    completely. Drop the fish into the crumbs next and pat the
    crumbs over the top.
6 / Set aside on a plate while you repeat with the remaining pieces of
    fish.
7 / Heat about 1cm of oil in a large frying pan until hot. Fry the fish,
    in batches if needed, for a 5–6 minutes per side, or until the
    crumb is golden. Check if the fish is cooked through; it should be
    hot all the way through and the fish should be opaque on the
    inside.
8 / Drain on kitchen paper and serve immediately with the aubergine
    fries, lemon wedges and crushed peas.
Crispy cod with aubergine fries
The Food Grinder Roast with sweet
potato dauphinoise
Everyone needs a good roast recipe up their sleeve (well maybe
‘needs’ is a little strong, but you see where we’re going with this)
and here is our favourite version, courtesy of our pal Alex, AKA
@thefoodgrinder
  The creamy dauphinoise puts it a little more on the indulgent
side, but hey, it’s a roast – who cooks a roast every day? So tuck
in and enjoy!

// SERVES 6 //
1 large whole chicken, the best quality you can afford
1 small bunch fresh rosemary
1 small bunch fresh thyme
60g butter
1 lemon, zested
½ red onion, halved again
1 whole garlic bulb, halved widthwise
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

DAUPHINOISE
1kg sweet potatoes
750ml double cream

KALE SALAD
1 x 180g bag kale
3 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
2 tbsp lemon juice
½ red chilli, very finely diced
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200ºC/Gas 6. Weigh the bird and calculate the
    roasting time, giving it 20 minutes for every 500g, plus an extra
   20 minutes.
2 / Strip half of the rosemary and thyme leaves from their stalks and
    chop very finely; leave aside a spoonful of herbs for the
    dauphinoise. Mix the chopped herbs with the butter, lemon zest
    and a bit of seasoning. Carefully lift up the skin of the chicken,
    separating it from the meat, and spread the butter all over the
    top of the bird under the skin.
3 / Slice the zested lemon in half and place it in the cavity of the
    chicken, along with the onion, garlic bulb and the rest of the
    herbs. Roast for the calculated cooking time, covering the bird
    with a piece of foil if it begins to start looking a bit brown on top.
4 / While the chicken is roasting, prepare the dauphinoise. Slice the
    potatoes into 2–3mm slices – a mandoline is easiest for this. Lay
    them in a buttered rectangular baking dish.
5 / Put the cream along with the rosemary and thyme in a saucepan
    and heat to just simmering. Season really well with salt and
    pepper and pour over the potato slices in the baking dish. Put the
    dauphinoise in the oven with the chicken for the last hour of
    cooking.
6 / While the chicken and dauphinoise are cooking, prepare the kale
    salad. Put the kale in a bowl and drizzle over the oil and lemon
    juice. Using your hands, massage the dressing into the kale. Keep
    going for a good 5–10 minutes as the massaging will tenderise
    the kale. Add the chopped chilli and season well with salt and
    pepper.
7 / Remove the chicken from the oven and check that the juices run
    clear when pierced in the thickest place with a knife. Check that
    the dauphinoise is cooked by inserting a knife into the centre – if
    it goes in easily without any resistance, it is done. Serve the
    chicken with the dauphinoise and kale salad.
The Food Grinder Roast with sweet potato dauphinoise
Stuffed rolled steak with sweet potato
wedges
The colours in this when sliced are awesome and look pretty
fancy too. You’ll need to expend a little more effort than if you
were just whacking a steak in a pan, but the extra flavours you
get are absolutely worth it. A dish to impress with.

// SERVES 4 //
700g flank or bavette steak, in one long piece
6 slices prosciutto
125g ball mozzarella, sliced thinly
handful basil leaves
1 tbsp olive oil
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
1 quantity Sweet Potato Wedges (see here), to serve


1 / Preheat the oven to 190ºC/Gas 5.
2 / Put the steak between 2 sheets of clingfilm and bash with a
    rolling pin to thin it to 1cm thick and to tenderise it. Remove the
    top layer of clingfilm and season well with salt and pepper.
3 / Lay the prosciutto slices over the entire surface of the steak. On
    top of that, lay the mozzarella slices, leaving a couple of inches
    clear at one end, followed by the basil leaves. Turn the steak so
    it’s widthways on to you and the space without the cheese is at
    the far end. Start rolling up the steak from the nearest end,
    firmly but not too tightly, as you don’t want the cheese to be
    squeezed out. Once you have a roll, tie it up with pieces of string
    at 4cm intervals, again not pulling it too tight, and making sure
    the knots in the string are on the underside of the roll, where the
    seam is.
4 / Heat the oil in a frying pan with an ovenproof handle until very
    hot. Sear the steak roll for about 5 minutes, turning regularly,
    until it is browned all over. Transfer the pan to the oven and
    roast for about 35 minutes if you’d like it quite pink in the
    middle. Cook for another 5–10 minutes if you’d like it more well
    done. Remove the steak from the hot pan and place on a chopping
    board, cover with a sheet of foil, and leave to rest for about 10
    minutes before carving.
5 / Serve slices of the steak roll with the sweet potato wedges.
JAMES’S TIP

This goes great with a simple rocket and tomato salad; simply toss
some rocket with sliced tomatoes, add a little lemon juice and a
drizzle of olive oil.
Any-fish traybake
When we say any fish, we mean any fish; if its got fins, it will
probably work. The combination of roasted fennel, lemon, garlic
and new potatoes is such a good one it goes with everything from
salmon to sea bass. This is definitely a recipe where it’s worth
experimenting with the more sustainable (and often cheaper)
types of fish such as coley and pollock.

// SERVES 2 //
1 red pepper
1 whole garlic head
1 red onion
½ lemon, cut into wedges
1 fennel bulb, cut into 6 wedges
1 tsp pink peppercorns
10 small new potatoes, sliced
1 tsp fennel seeds
extra virgin olive oil, to drizzle
250g spinach leaves
2 thick white fish fillets, such as brill or sea bass
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200°C/Gas 6.
2 / Slice the pepper in half, remove the core and seeds and cut the
    pepper into 1.5cm thick slices. Throw into a roasting tin.
3 / Slice the garlic across the equator, not pole to pole, and throw
    that in to the tin with the pepper. Add the lemon wedges, fennel
    wedges, peppercorns, potatoes and fennel seeds. Drizzle with oil,
    season with salt and pepper and toss, using your hands, so
    everything is coated.
4 / Put in the oven for 35–40 minutes, until the fennel has softened
    and the garlic turned golden.
5 / Meanwhile, bring a pan of water to the boil and blanch the
    spinach for 30 seconds, drain and rinse under cold water.
    Squeeze out as much water as you can from the spinach to
    prevent the dish becoming watery.
6 / Take the veggies out of the oven and arrange the fish fillets over
    the top. Scatter with the spinach, season with salt and pepper,
    and return to the oven for 12–15 minutes, or until the fish is
    opaque and cooked through. Serve immediately with a drizzle of
    extra virgin olive oil.
Any-fish traybake
Rainbow rice
Any dish that involves halloumi is a winner in our books, and
this one is no exception. Packed full of veg, this is as healthy as it
is hearty. Adding the toasted coconut and cashews gives a little
unexpected twist, and adds a great warmth and depth to the
dish.

// SERVES 2–3 //
1 tbsp coconut oil
½ red onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, finely diced
1 red and 1 green pepper, cored and finely chopped
1 courgette, finely diced
185g brown rice
5 rainbow chard leaves, roughly chopped
435ml chicken or vegetable stock
125g halloumi, cut into 2cm squares
handful of cashew nuts
handful of desiccated coconut
2 spring onions, thinly sliced
extra virgin olive oil, to serve
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Heat the oil in a flameproof casserole pan. Fry the onion and
    garlic for 10 minutes, until soft. Add the peppers and courgette
    and cook for 5–10 minutes. Stir in the rice and chard, and let it
    cook for just a minute. Then pour over the stock. Season with salt
    and pepper.
2 / Cut a circle of baking parchment the size of the pan and sit it on
    top of the surface of the rice. Put the lid on top and cook over
    very low heat for 20–30 minutes, or until the rice has absorbed
    most of the liquid and is tender to bite. Take off the heat and
    leave to sit for 10 minutes.
3 / Meanwhile, heat a frying pan with a dash of oil. Add the
    halloumi and fry until golden on both sides. Remove to drain on
    kitchen paper. Wipe round the pan with a little more kitchen roll,
    then tip in the cashews and coconut. Toss them around the pan
    to lightly toast.
4 / Take the lid off the pan and fold through the halloumi, coconut,
    spring onions and cashews. Drizzle with a little olive oil and
    serve at room temperature.
Rainbow rice
Hummus 4 ways
Just like a good roast, it’s worth having a hummus recipe in your
repertoire. Here you’ve got a classic version and three variations
– the beetroot is our favourite if only for the colour it goes. Serve
with crudités, pitta or wholemeal tortilla chips (see here).

// SERVES 4–6 //
1 × 400g tin chickpeas, rinsed and drained
1 plump garlic clove, peeled and roughly chopped
juice of 1½ lemons
4 tbsp olive oil
2 tbsp tahini
2 tbsp natural yoghurt
1 tsp sea salt
smoked paprika, to sprinkle
extra virgin olive oil, to drizzle


CLASSIC
1 / Put the chickpeas in a food processor and process to a stiff paste.
    Add the garlic, lemon juice, olive oil, tahini, yoghurt and salt.
    Blitz again, then slowly drizzle in 1–2 tablespoons ice-cold water,
    mixing for another 3 minutes, until you have a smooth paste and
    to your desired consistency. Adjust the seasoning, to taste.
2 / Transfer to a bowl and let the hummus sit in the fridge for 30
    minutes, to allow the garlic to mellow.

BEETROOT AND FETA
Add 3 tinned or vacuum-packed beetroots, drained. Omit the
paprika and serve with crumbled feta and a few nigella seeds over
the top.

CANNELLI BEANS, PEAS AND MINT
CANNELLI BEANS, PEAS AND MINT
Replace the chickpeas with cannellini beans. Add a handful of fresh
and cooked peas and plenty of mint, and omit the paprika.

ROASTED RED PEPPER
Add 1–2 roasted and peeled red peppers from a jar.
Hummus 4 ways
Courgette & feta frittata muffins
Much lighter than your average muffin, these gluten-free mini
frittatas make a great snack and are equally good for breakfast.
Courgette and feta is our favourite filling, but peas, cheddar, a
little roast sweet potato or mushrooms work well too.

// MAKES 8 //
butter or oil, for greasing
120g grated courgette (about 1 small courgette)
6 large eggs
small handful mint leaves, finely chopped
100g feta cheese, diced into 5mm cubes
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 180ºC/Gas 4 and grease really well 8 holes of
    a non-stick muffin tin.
2 / Sandwich the grated courgette between several sheets of kitchen
    paper and press down on the paper to squeeze out as much water
    as you can.
3 / Whisk the eggs, then stir in the grated courgette, chopped mint
    and most of the feta cubes. Season the mixture really well with
    black pepper and a little salt, remembering that the cheese is
    quite salty.
4 / Divide the mixture evenly between the holes of the muffin tin and
    sprinkle the remaining feta over the top of the mixture. Bake for
    about 18 minutes, or until the frittatas are risen, golden and
    cooked through. Remove from the tin while still warm or they
    may stick.
Courgette & feta frittata muffins
Protein truffles
These taste even better than they look. And there’s something
distinctly chocolate-bar-with-nuts-and-caramel about the bars…

// MAKES APPROX. 12 //
100g dark chocolate
100g ground almonds
1 tbsp maple syrup
1 tbsp whey protein (chocolate or vanilla flavour work well)

TOPPINGS
Chopped nuts (hazelnuts work well)
Desiccated coconut


1 / Get yourself a big heatproof bowl and place over a pan of
    simmering water. Break the chocolate over it and leave to melt
    (don’t stir the chocolate while it’s melting). Take off the heat, stir
    in the almonds, maple syrup and whey protein to combine. Stick
    the bowl in the fridge for an hour or so.
2 / Remove from the fridge and use your hands to scoop little balls
    of the mixture – which should have hardened slightly – and roll
    in a topping of your choice. We find that scattering the toppings
    on a large plate works well. Stick back in the fridge for another
    hour to set, then try not to eat them all at once!
PB-cookie-dough bars
MAKES APPROX. 16 BARS
3 tbsp peanut butter (smooth or crunchy)
1 tsp vanilla essence or extract
80g dark-chocolate chips
100g ground almonds
1 tbsp honey or maple syrup
1 tbsp whey protein (chocolate or vanilla work well)
melted chocolate for drizzling (optional)


1 / Melt the peanut butter with the vanilla, either in the microwave
    or in a heatproof bowl set over simmering water. Stir in the
    ground almonds and honey, and mix well to combine. Leave to
    cool a little then mix in the whey protein and dark-chocolate
    chips till you have a big ball of cookie-dough-like consistency.
    Flatten the ball into a tray lined with baking parchment, so that
    it is evenly spread out and roughly 2cm thick. Chill in the fridge
    for a couple of hours.
2 / To up the chocolate ante, melt a little dark chocolate and drizzle
    over the top before putting in the fridge to chill. Looks pretty too.
Protein truffles & PB-cookie-dough bars
Carrot & walnut muffins
These are light, fluffy and a world away from the dry pretenders
you get in shops. The grated apple adds a natural sweetness, but
if you’re after a little more sweet for your buck, check out Tom’s
tip below.

// MAKES 12 //
300g white spelt flour
2 tsp ground cinnamon
2 tsp baking powder
pinch table salt
100g mild, odourless coconut oil
150ml maple syrup, plus extra to drizzle (optional – see below)
2 large eggs, beaten
125g grated carrot (about 1 large carrot, peeled)
125g grated apple (about 1 apple, peeled)
100g walnuts, roughly chopped


1 / Preheat the oven to 190ºC/Gas 5 and line a 12-hole muffin tin
    with paper cases (the parchment tulip ones are good for these).
2 / Combine all the dry ingredients in a large mixing bowl.
3 / Melt the coconut oil in a pan over gentle heat. Remove from the
    heat and mix in the maple syrup.
4 / Make a well in the centre of the dry ingredients and pour in the
    oil and syrup mixture, beaten eggs, grated carrot and apple, and
    two-thirds of the walnuts. Mix together with a large spoon until
    just incorporated – be careful not to overmix or the mixture may
    be tough.
5 / Spoon the mixture evenly between the muffin cases and sprinkle
    the remaining walnuts over the tops. Bake in the oven for 22
    minutes, until cooked through and golden on top.
TOM’S TIP

These are sweet, but not as tooth-achingly sweet as the coffee-shop
muffins we have got used to. If you want them a little sweeter, just
drizzle a bit more maple syrup over each muffin once they come
out of the oven and are still warm.
Banana & chocolate (n)ice cream



This is pretty much instant ice cream – no churners needed. Go
for bananas that are little on the old side, as they will have a
more intense natural sweetness.

// SERVES 2 //
2 bananas, peeled, sliced and frozen
1 tbsp raw cacao powder or 3 tbsp Nutella
2 tsp maple syrup or honey, or 1 date, chopped
½ tsp vanilla extract
pinch sea salt flakes


1 / Put the bananas in a food processor and blend until smooth,
    scraping down the sides occasionally. Add the cacao powder,
    maple, syrup, vanilla and salt and blend again to combine. Serve
    and enjoy.
2 / This can be made in advance and stored in the freezer for up to a
    day.
VARIATIONS

Try grating over fresh coconut or topping with chopped pistachio
nuts or cashews. A small pinch of ground cardamom will also add a
lovely spice dimension.
Banana & chocolate (n)ice cream
Banana bread
What the (n)ice cream said – the riper the banana the better. If
you don’t have much of a sweet tooth feel free to leave out the
coconut sugar; on the other hand, if you are a more-the-merrier
type when it comes to sweetness, chuck in a handful of dark
chocolate chips. Once it’s a day old this toasts brilliantly too.

// MAKES 1 LOAF (8–10 SLICES) //
200g oats
1 tsp baking powder
½ tsp bicarbonate of soda
1 tsp ground cinnamon
pinch salt
2 large overripe bananas
1 tbsp crunchy peanut butter
40g coconut oil
40g coconut sugar
1 tbsp lemon juice
2 eggs, beaten


1 / Preheat the oven to 180ºC/Gas 4 and grease and line a 450g loaf
    tin.
2 / Put the oats in a food processor and grind them down to a flour.
    Tip into a bowl and mix in the baking powder, bicarbonate of
    soda, cinnamon and salt. Set aside.
3 / Mash the bananas in a mixing bowl with a fork. Don’t worry
    about getting them too smooth as the mixer will finish that off.
    Add the peanut butter, coconut oil, sugar and lemon juice and
    whisk with an electric hand whisk. Crack in the eggs and whisk
    again.
4 / Tip the dry ingredients into the banana mixture and fold in with
    a large spoon until well incorporated. Pour the mixture into the
prepared loaf tin and spread evenly. Bake in the oven for 50
minutes–1 hour, or until a skewer inserted into the centre of the
cake comes out clean. Check on it after 30 minutes, as you may
need to cover the top of the loaf with a sheet of foil to stop the
top going too dark. Allow the cake to cool in the tin for 10
minutes, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely before
slicing.
Sweet potato brownies
Recipes that involve vegetables and chocolate are no longer
considered bonkers, for which we should all be thankful; from
beetroot to courgette and aubergine, moist and dense veggies
combined with good quality cocoa powder are a match made in
heaven. Here the sweet potato flesh saves you having to add a
tonne of butter and sugar to keep things sweet and fudgy.

// MAKES 12 //
3–4 medium sweet potatoes (to give you 300g mashed flesh)
150g crunchy sugar-free peanut butter
6 tbsp maple syrup
3 large eggs, beaten
60g cocoa powder
1 tsp baking powder


1 / Preheat the oven to 180ºC/Gas 4 and grease and line a 20 x 25cm
    brownie tin.
2 / Put the sweet potatoes in the microwave and cook for about 8
    minutes. Stick a knife in to check the potatoes are soft and
    cooked all the way through, and, if not, cook a little longer until
    they are. Scoop the flesh out of the potatoes and weigh out 300g
    (you can eat the remainder or use it in another dish).
3 / In a large mixing bowl, whisk together the sweet potato, peanut
    butter and maple syrup with an electric hand whisk until well
    combined, then whisk in the eggs.
4 / Sift the cocoa and baking powder into the bowl and fold
    everything together until well combined.
5 / Pour the batter into the prepared brownie tin and spread out
    evenly. Bake in the oven for 20 minutes, until risen and firm on
    top. Leave to cool for a few minutes in the tin, then transfer to a
   wire rack to cool completely.
6 / Cut into 12 slices to serve.
Lemon polenta cake



This is great served with a dollop of Greek yoghurt or crème
fraiche, or to keep it vegan whip up a quick vanilla cream: whisk
coconut cream with a teaspoon of vanilla essence and a grating of
lemon zest.

// SERVES 8 //
90g fine polenta
55g ground almonds
120g plain flour
2½ tsp baking powder
pinch of salt
170g unrefined caster sugar
2 tbsp maple syrup
70ml rapeseed or grapeseed oil
250ml soy milk or almond milk
2 tsp cider vinegar
zest of 3 lemons
juice of 2 lemons

DRIZZLE
juice of 2 lemons
3 tbsp unrefined caster sugar


1 / Preheat the oven to 190°C/Gas 5. Grease and line a 20cm
    springform cake tin.
2 / Whisk together the polenta, ground almonds, flour and baking
    powder in a large bowl. Add the salt.
3 / In a separate bowl, combine the sugar, syrup, oil, milk, vinegar,
    lemon zest and juice, and stir well. Pour this mixture into the dry
    ingredients and stir until just combined.
4 / Transfer to the tin and bake for 35–45 minutes, until a skewer
    inserted into the middle of the cake comes out clean.
5 / About 5 minutes before the cake is due to come out of the oven,
    heat the lemon juice and caster sugar in a small pan and simmer
    until syrupy, about 5 minutes.
6 / Take the cake out of the oven and poke holes in the surface using
    a wooden skewer. Drizzle over the syrup, then leave the cake to
    cool in the tin for 10 minutes, before transferring to a wire rack
    to cool completely.
7 / Serve with yoghurt and grated lemon zest, if you like.
Lemon polenta cake
Pistachio ice cream
Another instant ice cream favourite. The matcha powder adds
some colour and a little extra health kick, but it isn’t essential so
don’t worry if you don’t have any to hand. We love how the green
of the toasted pistachios matches the creamy green of the
avocado, but any nut will work well here.

// SERVES 2 //
40g raw unsalted pistachios
1 ripe avocado, chilled
1 small banana, peeled and frozen
2 tsp honey or maple syrup
1 tsp matcha powder (optional)
¼ tsp vanilla extract
¼ tsp lime juice
pinch sea salt flakes


1 / Toast the pistachios in a dry pan until nice and fragrant. Let cool
    and roughly chop.
2 / Blitz the remaining ingredients in a food processor until smooth
    and creamy. Fold through most of the chopped pistachios, then
    serve immediately with the remaining pistachios on top.
Pistachio ice cream
Chocolate orange pots
Yup, tofu in a pudding. Bear with us on this one, because it is the
bomb… You’re after the silken tofu here, which is often packaged
in a little tetra pak and stacked down the store-cupboard aisle
(as opposed to the fridge section with the firm tofu). This has the
most amazing ganache texture once chilled, and we bet you no
one will be able to guess what the secret ingredient is!

// SERVES 4 //
60g dark chocolate
½ tsp coconut oil
300g silken tofu, drained and excess water squeezed out in kitchen paper
2 tbsp maple syrup
juice and finely grated zest of ½ orange, plus extra shavings to serve
½ tsp vanilla seeds
pinch flaked sea salt


1 / Melt the chocolate and coconut oil in the microwave over
    medium heat for 2–3 minutes. You want the chocolate to be just
    melted; don’t let it overcook.
2 / Put the tofu, chocolate, maple syrup, orange, vanilla and salt in
    the food processor and blitz until silky smooth.
3 / Pour into small glasses, jars or cups and sprinkle with the extra
    orange zest. Leave in the fridge to set for 2 hours.
Chocolate orange pots
Sticky toffee pudding
Hell yes we have a sticky toffee pudding recipe! The Pudding of
all puddings, our version here is lighter and much lower in sugar
than your typical stodge-fest, but no less tasty for it; just look
how excited Tom is!

// SERVES 6 //
150g dates
60g butter
100g coconut sugar
2 large eggs
50ml maple syrup
1 tsp bicarbonate soda
1 tsp baking powder
150g white spelt flour

SAUCE
150g dates
60g butter


1 / Preheat the oven to 180ºC/Gas 4, lightly butter your baking dish.
2 / Put the dates in a bowl, cover with 150ml boiling water and leave
    them to soak for about 20 minutes.
3 / Put the dates and the soaking water in a food processor and blitz
    to a smooth purée. Transfer to a large bowl with the butter and
    coconut sugar and whisk together. Whisk in the eggs, one at a
    time, beating between each addition, followed by the maple
    syrup.
4 / Mix the baking powder and bicarbonate of soda with the flour in
    another bowl, then sift the dry ingredients into the date mixture.
    Using a large spoon or spatula, fold everything together until
    well incorporated. Pour the mixture into the prepared baking
   dish and bake in the oven for about 35 minutes, or until risen and
   a skewer inserted into the centre of the pudding comes out clean.
5 / While the sponge is cooking, make the sauce. Put the dates in a
    bowl and pour over 250ml boiling water. Leave to soak for about
    10 minutes (you want the water to still be warm), then transfer to
    a food processor, add the butter and blend everything to a
    smooth sauce. If it’s a little thick, add another splash of hot
    water until it is the consistency you’d like. Serve the sponge with
    the sauce poured over.
Sticky toffee pudding
Avo-choc truffles



Another sneaky veg-cocoa combo; if you’re finding the truffles a
little too gooey to roll at first put the mix in the freezer for 10
minutes or so.

// MAKES 18–20 //
1 ripe avocado, peeled, stoned and roughly chopped
100g ground almonds
4½ tbsp maple syrup
50g cocoa powder, plus extra to roll the truffles in


1 / Put all the ingredients in a food processor and blend to form a
    smooth, thick paste.
2 / Sift a good layer of cocoa powder onto a plate. Scoop up small
    lumps of the paste and roll them between your palms to create
    balls. Roll the balls in the cocoa powder and store in the fridge
    until ready to serve.
Apple & blackberry crumble



The perfect end to any roast. This version is vegan, low sugar and
gluten-free depending on the oats you use; it’s also warming,
cinnamonny (that’s a word, right?) and smells as good as it
tastes. Serve with a dollop of the vanilla cream (see here).

// SERVES 4 //
3 apples, peeled and cut into wedges
2 tbsp runny honey
1 tsp vanilla extract
juice of 1 lemon
130g fresh or frozen blackberries

CRUMBLE TOPPING
75g coconut oil
100g oat flour
70g rolled oats
pinch sea salt
40g flaked almonds
25g ground almonds
60g brown or coconut sugar
1 tsp ground cinnamon
½ tsp mixed spice


1 / Preheat the oven to 180°C/Gas 4. Put the apples in a pan with the
    honey, vanilla and lemon juice. Heat over medium–low heat and
    cook gently for 10 minutes, until the apples are just tender. Take
    off the heat.
2 / Tip the apples into a baking tin and scatter with the berries.
3 / Melt the coconut oil in the microwave or in a pan. Combine with
    the oat flour, rolled oats, salt, flaked and ground almonds, sugar,
    cinnamon and mixed spice. Scatter the crumble over the top of
    the apples and berries.
4 / Bake in the oven for 35–45 minutes, until the juices from the fruit
    start to bubble up at the edges.
Apple & blackberry crumble
Chocolate coconut cookies
Chocolate and coconut – a match made in bounty-ful heaven. If
you can’t find the strong-flavoured coconut oil go with the mild
stuff and simply add an extra spoonful of desiccated coconut.

// MAKES 12 //
130g rolled oats
75g coconut oil (don’t use the mild, odourless coconut oil – you want the coconut flavour in
this)
1 egg
4 tbsp honey
30g cocoa powder
25g desiccated coconut
50g chocolate chips (optional)


1 / Preheat the oven to 190ºC/Gas 5 and line a baking sheet with
    baking parchment.
2 / Put the oats in a food processor and process to grind them down
    to a flour. Add all the remaining ingredients, except the chocolate
    drops, to the food processor and blitz until well combined.
    Remove the blade and stir in the chocolate drops, if using.
3 / Form the dough into 12 balls by rolling portions between your
    palms. Place the balls on the prepared baking sheet and press
    down on each to form a round about 5mm thick. Bake in the oven
    for 15 minutes, until crisp on top but still a little gooey in the
    middle. Allow to cool on the baking sheet before serving.
Easy-peasy chicken pie
The idea in this section is to take a few ingredients that you’ll
probably have already – butter, salt and pepper – and add just
four star ingredients (hence the hero part).
  This pie is a proper ‘hey presto’ dinner that’s ready before you
know it. Do use frozen veg if you have any, but beware that
cutting any big florets might prove tricky!

// SERVES 4 //
800g SWEET POTATOES, peeled and cut into large chunks
40g butter
1 tbsp olive oil
6 CHICKEN THIGHS, chopped into large chunks
1 x 480g bag PREPARED VEG
jelly chicken STOCK POT
1 tbsp cornflour, dissolved in 2 tbsp water
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 180ºC/Gas 4.
2 / Boil the sweet potatoes for 12–15 minutes until tender. Tip into a
    colander to drain and leave for 5 minutes to steam dry. Transfer
    to a large mixing bowl and mash, adding the butter and a good
    amount of salt and pepper, then set aside.
3 / Heat the oil in a pan set over high heat and fry the chicken until
    browning on the outside. Meanwhile, fill a deep baking dish half
    full with the prepared veg. If you come across any huge florets of
    broccoli or cauliflower, chop those in half to speed up cooking.
    Tip in the browned chicken and any juices from the pan and mix
    together with the veg.
4 / Add the stock pot to the pan the chicken was in and top up with
    450ml of boiling water. Stir over the heat until the stock cube has
    dissolved, then add in the cornflour and water mixture. Cook for
   about 5 minutes until the liquid thickens to a gravy.
5 / Pour the gravy over the chicken and veggies in the pie dish until
    the liquid comes to the same level as the fillings (don’t add it all
    in if there’s too much). Spoon the sweet potato mash over the top
    and ruffle it up a bit on the top so it’s not completely smooth.
6 / Bake the pie in the oven for 40 minutes, or until the chicken and
    the vegetables are cooked. The sweet potato won’t go brown like
    standard mash, but may start to blacken along the ridges where
    it has been ruffled up.
Fudge protein brownies
Full credit to Alex@thefoodgrinder for these gems. Whenever
this recipe goes up on one of our accounts the response is huge;
never underestimate the power of a truly fudgy brownie –
particularly when you can count the ingredients on one hand.

// MAKES 9 //
4 overripe BANANAS
120g crunchy PEANUT BUTTER
50g COCOA powder
30g vegan PROTEIN POWDER


1 / Preheat the oven to 180ºC/Gas 4 and grease and line a 20cm
    square brownie tin with baking parchment.
2 / Put the bananas in a bowl and mash them to a pulp with a fork.
    Mix in the peanut butter, followed by the cocoa and protein
    powders.
3 / Spoon the batter into the prepared brownie tin, smooth level and
    bake for 20 minutes, until firm on top, but still fudgy and gooey
    in the middle. Leave to cool in the tin, then slice into 9 squares to
    serve.
Sweet potato frittata
This is such a great option for lunch or supper – quick, easy,
protein-packed and delicious. Use up any leftover sweet potato
wedges (see here), if ‘leftover sweet potato wedges’ isn’t
impossible…

// SERVES 2 //
1 tbsp olive oil
250g SWEET POTATO, peeled and diced into 1cm cubes
5 large EGGS
100g FETA cheese, diced into 1cm cubes
small handful BASIL leaves, shredded, plus extra to serve
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the grill to high.
2 / Heat the oil in a non-stick frying pan with a heatproof handle.
    Add the sweet potato and sauté over medium heat for 10–15
    minutes until it’s picked up a bit of colour on all sides and is
    cooked throughout. You don’t have to watch this like a hawk –
    just remember to give it a stir every few minutes.
3 / Meanwhile, break the eggs into a mixing bowl and season with
    salt and pepper. Stir in the diced feta and shredded basil.
4 / Once the sweet potato is cooked, pour the egg mixture into the
    pan and mix around gently so that the sweet potato is spread
    evenly throughout. Leave the frittata to cook for about 5 minutes
    until the bottom is well set, then put the pan under the hot grill
    and cook for a further 2–3 minutes, until the top is puffing up
    and browned.
5 / Serve sprinkled with a little extra shredded basil.
Tart 4-ways
Not just one, but four four-ingredient options! We do spoil you.
Make these for supper and pack any leftovers up for lunch the
next day.


Leek, blue cheese & bacon

1 x 320g sheet ready-rolled puff PASTRY
1 tbsp olive oil, plus extra if needed
2 small LEEKS, sliced into 5mm thick slices
80g smoked BACON lardons
80g BLUE CHEESE, crumbled
freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200ºC/Gas 6.
2 / Lay the sheet of pastry on a non-stick baking tray. On each edge
    of the rectangle, fold in a thin strip of pastry towards the middle,
    about 1cm thick, and press down gently to create a border of
    double-thickness pastry around the whole sheet. Prick the base
    in the middle several times with a fork to stop it rising up too
    much. Bake in the oven for 12 minutes, until beginning to turn
    pale golden, then remove from the oven.
3 / Meanwhile, heat the oil in a frying pan over medium heat and
    add the leeks and bacon. Sauté gently for about 10 minutes until
    the leeks are softened and just picking up some colour.
4 / Spread the cooked leeks and bacon over the pastry base, being
    careful not to go up onto the raised edge. Sprinkle the crumbled
    blue cheese over the tart and season well with pepper (you won’t
    need salt because the bacon and cheese are both very salty). Bake
    for 18–20 minutes, until the pastry is cooked through and the
toppings are beginning to brown.
Cream cheese, smoked salmon & spinach

1 x 320g sheet ready-rolled puff PASTRY
200g baby SPINACH
150g CREAM CHEESE
100g SMOKED SALMON, cut into ribbons
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200ºC/Gas 6.
2 / Lay the sheet of pastry on a non-stick baking tray. On each edge
    of the rectangle, fold in a thin strip of pastry towards the middle,
    about 1cm thick, and press down gently to create a border of
    double-thickness pastry around the whole sheet. Prick the base
    in the middle several times with a fork to stop it rising up too
    much. Bake in the oven for 12 minutes, until beginning to turn
    pale golden, then remove from the oven.
3 / Meanwhile, steam the spinach for 2 minutes until just wilted.
    Remove it from the steamer with a fork so you don’t bring any
    water with it, lay it between several sheets of kitchen paper and
    gently squeeze out any excess moisture.
4 / Spread the cream cheese all over the middle of the tart, being
    careful not to go up onto the raised edge. Spread the cooked
    spinach out over that and grind over a little salt (you won’t need
    much as the salmon will be salty) and plenty of black pepper.
    Sprinkle the salmon ribbons over the top of the tart. Bake for 18–
    20 minutes, until the pastry is cooked through and golden.
Tomato, mozzarella & pesto

1 x 320g sheet ready-rolled puff PASTRY
1 x 145g jar PESTO
2 TOMATOES (about 200g total weight), thinly sliced
150g MOZZARELLA cheese, thinly sliced
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200ºC/Gas 6.
2 / Lay the sheet of pastry on a non-stick baking tray. On each edge
    of the rectangle, fold in a thin strip of pastry towards the middle,
    about 1cm thick, and press down gently to create a border of
    double-thickness pastry around the whole sheet. Prick the base
    in the middle several times with a fork to stop it rising up too
    much. Bake in the oven for 12 minutes, until beginning to turn
    pale golden, then remove from the oven.
3 / Spread the pesto all over the middle of the tart, being careful not
    to go up onto the raised edge. Lay the tomato slices over the tart,
    followed by the mozzarella slices. Grind salt and pepper over the
    top of the tart. Bake for 18–20 minutes, until the pastry is cooked
    through and the cheese is beginning to brown.
Beetroot, goat’s cheese & rocket

1 x 320g sheet ready-rolled puff PASTRY
150g cooked BEETROOT, grated
150g log soft GOAT’S CHEESE
25g ROCKET leaves
sea salt and freshly ground black pepper


1 / Preheat the oven to 200ºC/Gas 6.
2 / Lay the sheet of pastry on a non-stick baking tray. On each edge
    of the rectangle, fold in a thin strip of pastry towards the middle,
    about 1cm thick, and press down gently to create a border of
    double-thickness pastry around the whole sheet. Prick the base
    in the middle several times with a fork to stop it rising up too
    much. Bake in the oven for 12 minutes, until beginning to turn
    pale golden, then remove from the oven.
3 / Meanwhile, put the grated beetroot between several sheets of
    kitchen paper and gently squeeze out any excess moisture. Once
    the pastry has come out of the oven, sprinkle the beetroot over
    the middle of the tart, being careful not to go up onto the raised
    edge. Crumble the goat’s cheese all over the beetroot, season with
    salt and pepper, and return to the oven. Bake for 18–20 minutes,
    until the pastry is cooked through and the cheese is beginning to
    brown. Sprinkle the rocket over the tart, to serve.
FITTER
If eating well is the foundation for a long-term and successful
fitness programme, then exercise provides the building blocks to a
Leaner, Fitter and Stronger you.
   If you haven’t exercised for a while, then the good news is that
your body craves movement and will respond very quickly to a
change in activity level. This means that, depending on how fit you
are to begin with and your body-fat percentage, you will start
seeing results fast. But just remember that you won’t get super-
shredded or down to your desired weight overnight: your rate of
progress will slow down over time and might, at some point,
plateau. That’s okay, in fact, that’s desirable: you’re more likely to
maintain your ideal physique if you get there slowly, aren’t too
restrictive in your diet or too ambitious when it comes to exercise. A
diet that is too restrictive can lead to craving the ‘bad’ foods, and an
overambitious exercise plan can lead to burnout, or worse, injury.
   Don’t forget that maintaining your new body shape is much easier
if you make eating well and exercising well part of your lifestyle.
You’re going to feel better from the inside out, move better, and –
the extra bonus that we are all aiming for – look better too. What’s
not to love?
   We advise a fitness programme based around two key workouts:
HIIT (high-intensity interval training) and strength training. HIIT
will improve your cardiovascular health and help to burn fat, while
strength training will improve your muscle tone and metabolism.
With a better muscle-to-fat ratio, you will burn more calories at
rest. And burning more calories at rest equals burning more fat
while at rest!
   Working out from home is fine, especially as we live in a climate
that can be unpredictable, i.e., wet! But don’t underestimate the
benefits of going outside and training in the park. Even in the damp,
exercising outside can lift your spirits and bolster your mood. And
then there’s the competitive aspect of training with a friend.
Healthy competition is a great thing – it will spur both of you on to
training better and harder, and maybe there’s a cheeky pint in it for
training better and harder, and maybe there’s a cheeky pint in it for
the person who’s worked hardest during the week. Don’t
underestimate the social benefits of training at the gym. We know:
the first few times that you go to the gym can be intimidating, but
remember that most people are there to focus on their own work
and are paying little attention to you. But working out surrounded
by other people who are also working out can get you into the right
mindset to train well. So whatever way you want to train – at home,
the park, with a buddy or in the gym, we have the exercises for you.



                                   TDEE



                      Remember to keep an eye on your
                    TDEE (see here). If you want to lose
                   weight, make sure that you’re working
                  with a calorie deficit, but factor in your
                 increased activity level as well. This is the
                    same when you’re working towards
                   muscle gain. Always be aware of your
                  increased activity levels and adjust your
                             TDEE accordingly.

                       It is far better for you to opt for a
                  calorie-controlled diet that includes the
                     foods you enjoy – and progressive
                   training. This means you are aware of
                     your calorie intake while gradually
                  increasing the intensity of your training
                                    over time.


MYTH BUSTING

Weights will make you bulky
Many women fear that doing weights will increase their body’s
Many women fear that doing weights will increase their body’s
bulk. In fact, weight training will not make you bulky. If your aim is
to build muscle, which is a hard and lengthy process, a proper
weights routine and diet will allow you to achieve this. However,
incorporating weights (resistance training) into your fitness routine
will not make you bulky, and is more beneficial long-term for
progress and health versus cardio alone.
  Weights can help benefit posture, core strength, decrease body-fat
levels and increase lean muscle, strength and fitness. In older
people they also help slow conditions such as weakening of the
bones.

You must do cardio every day
You do not need to do cardio every day in order to make progress.
Instead, we see resistance work with supplementary cardio as the
most sustainable and effective way to move towards your goals.
  Performing high-intensity cardio every day will likely blunt the
progress you could otherwise achieve from its inclusion in a well-
structured training and nutrition routine. HIIT cardio should be
used two to four times per week, depending on your ability to
tolerate it.

Cardio will make you toned
The idea that cardio alone will make you toned is not entirely
wrong, but spending hours tirelessly pounding away on the
treadmill isn’t efficient or rewarding. For fat loss, higher-intensity
interval training (HIIT) and weight training is far more beneficial.
And this, of course, has to be teamed with a calorie-controlled diet.
  A combination of resistance training supplemented with higher
and lower intensity forms of cardio is ideal to increase muscle
definition. ‘Toning’ occurs by reducing body fat to reveal more
definition of the muscle beneath the skin. This is why you can’t tone
a specific area like the tummy from solely completing crunches, or
the back of the upper arms from only tricep kickbacks. Choosing
where to lose fat from is impossible; it is only possible to reduce
your total body fat level.
              “ Be stronger than your excuses ”


If you do x amount of sit ups, you will have a flat stomach – aka fat
loss in a specific area through strength training While working a
specific area with resistance training may change the muscle shape,
definition and size over time, it will not cause you to lose fat just
from the targeted area. As previously mentioned, spot fat loss isn’t
possible.
   If you did full-body resistance workouts and intense cardio work
in combination with a calorie-controlled diet, you would have far
more success in increasing overall definition than if you were to do
solely donkey kickbacks, the recumbent bicycle and crunches in the
pursuit of a toned bum and mid-section.

You won’t get toned without supplements
Although some performance and dietary supplements are effective
and useful, you can make progress towards your goals without
them. While we would recommend vitamin D to most people, and
additional iron supplements to women, we do not recommend any
fat-burning products or thermogenic blends for one simple reason:
they do not work.
  Whey protein is already low-calorie and low-carbohydrate; diet
whey is just an expensive gimmick. Raspberry ketones, fat burners,
skinny or detox teas, carb blockers and basically any product
pushed by someone off ‘Desperate for Fame Island’ is, in our view, a
complete and utter waste of money.


High-Intensity Interval Training (HIIT)
High-intensity interval training, or HIIT, is the best way to get your
heart rate up and burn more fat less amount of time. The idea is
simple: short bursts of activity, giving it 100 per cent, alternated
with slightly longer rest periods. HIIT is so effective because you
are doing a lot of hard work in a very short period of time. This
burns a lot of calories and because you are working in an anaerobic
state (without enough oxygen), it builds up an oxygen deficit. This
oxygen deficit causes your cells to adapt, increasing your fitness
and also burning calories for up to 48 hours afterwards.
  It’s an incredibly efficient way of exercising and its effects are
long-lasting – after a session of HIIT, your body will burn more
calories for up to 48 hours. Moderate cardio isn’t anywhere near as
efficient, takes more time to do and doesn’t burn as much fat.



                            HOW OFTEN?



                       HIIT is, as its name states, high-
                    intensity. If you do too many HIIT
                  sessions a week, you run a real risk of
                  overtraining. Overtraining can increase
                    the risk of injury and burnout. We
                   recommend doing HIIT two to four
                     times a week, depending on your
                              tolerance for it.


5 BENEFITS OF HIIT
• It’s a great workout in only a short time, and you only need to do
  it 2–4 times per week: perfect to fit in around your busy lifestyle •
  Ideal for losing fat and maintaining muscle mass
• Excellent for your cardiovascular health
• Boosts endurance
• Always challenging – HIIT never gets easier, you just get better
  and can push yourself harder



           “ If it doesn’t challenge you… it doesn’t
“ If it doesn’t challenge you… it doesn’t
                change you ”
Tabata circuits
Tabata comprises 8 x 20-second intervals followed by a 10-second
rest. Here are five Tabata-style circuits using four different
exercises. You simply perform the four exercises consecutively for
two rounds, to complete the intervals. We find this way increases
variety and prevents the workout from becoming boring.




            “ The only workout you regret is the
                   one you didn’t do… ”
Circuit 1




HIGH KNEES
With your elbows by your side, hold your hands out directly in front
of you.
Begin running on the spot, keeping your arms and hands in place.

While running, aim to touch your knees to the palms of your hands
by lifting your legs high with each stride.
SQUAT THRUSTS
Assume a press-up position, hands shoulder width apart.

Simultaneously jump your feet towards your hands – tucking the
knees under the torso – before jumping back to the start.

Repeat at a fast pace.
SQUAT TAPS
Start in a regular squat position.

Explosively jump upwards, move your feet to the middle of your
body, landing on the balls of your feet with soft knees.
Without allowing your heels to touch the floor, jump your feet
outwards to the starting position, lowering to the base of the squat
and repeating.
PLANK
Place your forearms flat on the floor with your elbows just within,
and directly below, your shoulders.

Your body should be in a straight line from head to toe, with your
neck neutral.

Keep your core tight throughout and your breathing regular.
Circuit 2




SQUAT JUMPS
Stand with your feet shoulder width apart. Your body position and
movement should be the same as if you were performing a regular
squat, however on the upward phase, jump explosively upwards as
high as you can.
Land with soft knees and repeat.

Keep your head looking forwards throughout.
MOUNTAIN CLIMBER
Assume a press-up position and draw one knee under your body
(directly forwards) as far as comfortably possible.
Return to the starting position and repeat with the opposite leg.

Draw your knee towards the opposite elbow to increase the
difficulty.
COMMANDO
Start in a regular plank position, and move to the peak of a press-up
position, one arm at a time.
Lower into a plank position one arm at a time.

Keep the core tight throughout; to prevent lateral and vertical
movement.
movement.
LYING LEG RAISES
Lie flat on a mat with your arms by your side, or beneath the bum if
this is more comfortable.

Lift your feet upwards until the feet are directly above the hips,
keeping the legs straight.
In a controlled manner return to the starting position, but do not
In a controlled manner return to the starting position, but do not
allow your feet to touch the mat.
Circuit 3




STEP UPS
Take a bench and place your leading foot on it, torso leant forwards
and then drive through your front leg. Bring yourself up to a
standing position on the bench.
Lower yourself in a controlled manner and land softly.

Reset and repeat the movement.

RUSSIAN TWISTS
Lie down on the floor and raise your back and legs to form a v-
shape, keeping your back straight, your knees bent and your feet on
the floor.
Pick up your weight and lower it to each side, left and right, turning
with your weight as you go and looking in the direction of the turn.

To challenge yourself, raise your feet off the ground, keeping the v-
shape.

STAR JUMPS
Stand tall with your hands by your side, before jumping both feet
outwards and simultaneously moving the hands away from the
body to head height.
Land softly, before jumping back to the start position.

Repeat at a fast pace.
BENT OVER ROW
With soft knees and your torso leant forwards, keep the back flat
throughout.
Take a shoulder width overhand grip and draw the bar into your
belly button, keeping the elbows close past the sides.

Slowly lower to the base of the rep, feeling a stretch through the
back before repeating.
Circuit 4




BURPEES
Assume a press-up position and jump both feet in, tucking the knees
under the torso, before jumping vertically and extending the body.
Land softly and place the hands in the same position, before
jumping the feet back out to a start position.

Repeat at a fast pace.
KETTLEBELL DEADLIFT
Set your feet shoulder width apart, toes angled forward or slightly
outwards.
Assume the base of a deadlift position with the kettlebell directly
between the mid-foot touching the floor.

Bend at your knees and hips, and keep your back straight. Grasp the
handle. Drive upwards, extending your body and pulling your
shoulders back at the top of the rep.
PLANK
Place your forearms flat on the floor with your elbows just within
and directly below your shoulders.

Your body should be in a straight line from head to toe with your
neck neutral.

Keep your core tight throughout and your breathing regular.
SQUAT AND PRESS
Place your feet shoulder width apart, with your back straight and
your head neutral/looking forwards throughout.
Grip the dumbbells at shoulder height and squat as low as
comfortable, before standing tall and pressing the dumbbells
overhead.
Lower them to the shoulders and repeat.
Circuit 5




SQUAT TAPS
Start in a regular squat position.

Explosively jump upwards, move your feet to the middle of your
body and land on the balls of your feet with soft knees.

Without allowing your heels to touch the floor, jump your feet
outwards to the starting position. Lower to the base of the squat
and repeat.
BICYCLE CRUNCHES
Lie flat on a mat, hands touching your head and knees bent so that
your lower legs are parallel to the floor.

Crunch one shoulder towards the opposite knee, extending the other
leg away from you.
Return to the starting position and repeat for the opposite side.
MILITARY PRESS
Place your feet slightly wider than shoulder width apart (staggered
if preferred).
Grip the bar, hands shoulder width apart, or slightly wider; start
with it touching your chest just below your collarbone.
Press upwards, stopping just before full extension of your elbows.
Control the return phase.
TUCK JUMPS
Assume the top of a squat position, before sinking slightly and
jumping powerfully upwards.
Tuck the knees up and into the chest in flight, before landing with
soft knees in the start position.
Repeat at a comfortable pace.
Gym-free workouts
Free, convenient – sometimes there’s no beating the great outdoors
(and indoors for that matter!).

In the next few sections we’ll introduce you to some new terms; they
may already be familiar, or completely alien – either way they will
definitely take your workout to the next level.

DROP SET
A drop set is where you perform the exercise with a heavy weight
for X number of reps, then reduce the weight by around 30–40%
before completing Y more reps with no rest between the heavy and
light sets. This method of training will cause a burning feeling in
your muscles but ensures you use more of the target muscle fibres,
which equals more calories burnt!

SUPERSET
A superset is two different exercises performed back to back, with
no rest between the two – completing the assigned number of reps
on the first exercise before immediately moving on to the second
exercise. A superset can be performed on the same body part, or on
two differing body parts. This type of training can be used to save
time, recruit more muscle fibres and simply to add variation.

6–12–25
This is a great way to work varying rep ranges and perform a lot of
work quickly and brutally! It can be used on one muscle group or in
pairs with a main and secondary muscle group.
  You should start with a big compound exercise, performing 6 reps
with a 4-second eccentric (downwards) movement. Immediately
move on to another big, but less taxing, exercise, performing 12 reps
with 3-second eccentric phases. Lastly you finish with 25 reps on an
isolation exercise, with 1–2 second eccentric phases for a killer
burn. Make sure you don’t rest between the exercises!
Workout 1 Park Bench
You will need a sturdy park bench (make sure it’s not a memorial
one!).




EXERCISE 1: SINGLE-LEG STEP UP
Take a bench and place your leading foot on it, torso leant forwards
and then drive through your front leg. Bring yourself up to a
standing position on the bench.
Lower yourself in a controlled manner and land softly.
Reset and repeat the movement.
EXERCISE 2: BENCH DIPS

With your body in front of a bench, take a narrow grip behind you.
Keep your elbows tucked in throughout and your body upright.
Lower yourself down until your elbows hit 90 degrees, then push
upwards, stopping just prior to locking out your elbows.
Prevent the elbows flaring outwards.
EXERCISE 3: BENCH PRESS UPS
Assume a normal press-up position (see here), with the hands raised
on a bench.

Lower the chest to touch the bench, before driving the body away
and keeping the core tight.

Control the movement and repeat.
EXERCISE 4: MOUNTAIN CLIMBERS (HANDS RAISED)

Assume a press-up position (with the hands raised on the bench)
and draw one knee under your body (directly forwards) as far as
comfortably possible.
Return to the starting position and repeat with the opposite leg.

Draw your knee towards the opposite elbow to increase the
difficulty.
Workout 2 Outdoors
Find a relatively large space with no obstacles. Mark your start
point with a leaf, stone, piece of clothing or other visible marker.
Walk 100 strides and mark this point too. Return to your start point.




EXERCISE 1: SQUAT JUMPS SUPERSET TO PRESS UPS

Stand with your feet shoulder width apart. Your body position and
movement should be same as if you were performing a regular
squat, however on the upward phase, jump explosively upwards as
high as you can.
Land with soft knees and repeat.

Keep your head looking forwards throughout.

                                   //

Start with your hands slightly wider than your shoulders, arms
fully extended.

Focus on keeping your body flat throughout the rep. Your elbows
should stay close to your body, your chin almost touching the
ground at the bottom of each rep. Push your body upwards.
ground at the bottom of each rep. Push your body upwards.
Avoid locking out your elbows at the peak of the rep.




EXERCISE 2: COMMANDOS SUPERSET TO ALTERNATING
LUNGES

Start in a regular plank position and move to the peak of a press-up
position one arm at a time.
Lower into a plank position one arm at a time.

Keep the core tight throughout, preventing lateral and vertical
movement.

                                 //

Stand upright with your arms by your sides.

Step forwards, landing with a slight bend at your knee. Control the
eccentric phase until your front knee is at a right angle (knee
directly above ankle).
From here drive up and step back through your front leg to a
standing position and repeat for the other leg.




EXERCISE 3: STEP UPS SUPERSET TO BICYCLE CRUNCHES
Take a bench and place your leading foot on it, torso leant forwards
and then drive through your front leg. Bring yourself up to a
standing position on the bench.

Lower yourself in a controlled manner and land softly.
Reset and repeat the movement.

                                  //

Lie flat on a mat, hands touching your head and feet raised from the
floor and a 90-degree angle at your knees/hips.

Crunch one shoulder towards the opposite knee, extending the other
leg away from you.

Return to the starting position and repeat for the opposite side.

EXERCISE 4: STATIC LUNGES SQUATS GLUTE BRIDGES
Static lunge
Stand with one foot forward and the other back, making a triangle
with your legs. Without moving your feet, lower your rear leg until
your knee almost touches the floor while bending your front leg,
then repeat with your other side.
Squats
Stand tall with the feet outside shoulder width.

With your weight through the heels, sink down until your thighs are
parallel with the ground.

Press evenly through the feet; driving up to standing whilst keeping
the back straight and knees from caving inward.




               “ Focus on yourself, not others ”
Glute bridges
Lie on your back with the feet drawn towards the glutes, just
outside shoulder width.

Extend the hips to form a straight line between your knees and
shoulders by driving the bum upwards.
Lower slowly, touch the floor and repeat.
Workout 3 Sofa workout
Sofas are good for many things – watching Netflix on, napping on,
eating noodles on – but contrary to their sit-soft reputation, they
also make an excellent workout tool.




EXERCISE 1: FEET RAISED CRUNCHES
Lie on a mat with your legs at a 90-degree angle to your body, feet
placed on top of a sofa.
Shuffle your body so that your bum is close to the sofa and there is
a 90-degree angle at your knees.

Keep your neck neutral and crunch directly up, pause for a second
before slowly returning to the start.
EXERCISE 2: SOFA DIPS
With your body in front of a sofa, take a narrow grip, behind you.

Keep your elbows tucked in throughout and your body upright,
lower yourself down until your elbows hit 90 degrees, then push
upwards, stopping just prior to locking out your elbows.

Prevent the elbows flaring outwards.
EXERCISE 3: MOUNTAIN CLIMBERS (HANDS RAISED)
Assume a press-up position with the hands raised and draw one
knee under your body (directly forwards) as far as comfortably
possible.

Return to the starting position and repeat with the opposite leg.
Draw your knee towards the opposite elbow to increase the
difficulty.
difficulty.
EXERCISE 4: SOFA CRUNCHES
Perch yourself on the edge of the sofa and lift your feet off the floor.
Keeping your core strong, crunch your body and knees together
while maintaining balance on the edge of the sofa.
Hold this for a second before extending your body and legs back to
the starting position and repeat without allowing your feet to touch
the floor.
Buddy training

A bit of a competitive spirit can go a long way! Find a buddy on the
same level as you and egg each other on to improve your fitness
levels. Another advantage of training with a buddy is that they can
chivvy you up on days when you’re not feeling like working out –
and you can do the same for them, of course!

PRESS-UP CHALLENGE




Keep the same technique as explained here.
Perform alternate press ups with your partner until one of you can
perform no more.
When one of you fails, rest for 45 seconds before repeating – winner
is the best of 3!
PLANK CHALLENGE




Perform a plank with the same technique as previously explained.

Both of you should hold the plank for as long as possible until one
of you has to stop.

When one of you fails, rest for 45 seconds before repeating – winner
is the best of 3!
SIT UPS PASSING MEDICINE BALL




With a partner link your feet at the ankles and assume a sit up
position.

With one person holding the ball to their chest, simultaneously sit
up together and pass the ball, before returning to the base of the
rep.

Aim to stay in time and keep passing the ball. When one of you fails,
rest for 45 seconds before repeating – winner is the best of 3!
RUSSIAN TWIST AND PASS




Sit back to back with your partner. One of you hold the medicine
ball and twist to your right.

The other partner should twist to the left to meet the pass of the
medicine ball, then twist to the other side, where the original
partner takes back the ball.

Aim to stay in time and keep passing the medicine ball around you.
When one of you fails, rest for 45 seconds before repeating. Make
sure to switch directions between sets. Winner is the best of 3!
MEDICINE BALL SLAM PASSES




One partner throws the medicine ball down and at an angle; the
other partner catches and returns the slam so their partner can
catch.
Repeat.
SHUTTLE RUNS, TAG & GO

Stand about 25 meters away from each other and use a water bottle
to mark your starting positions.

Sprint to your buddy and back to your starting position; your
partner sprints when you’re back at your starting position.

Your rest is your partner’s sprint period.




STAIRS RUNS, TAG & GO

Start at the bottom of one flight of stairs (approximately 15–20
stairs). One of you should run up the stairs as fast as possible.
Once you reach the top of the stair, turn around and walk to the
bottom – the other partner should go when you return to the bottom
of the stairs.
Gym training
Strength training is at the core of our fitness programme. Its
benefits are numerous, from increasing your bone density and
improving your core muscles to helping you sleep better. Strength
training builds muscle, which in turn helps raise your metabolism,
meaning you will burn more calories (and therefore fat) each day
than you would if you changed your diet alone.
  Strength training isn’t just a great workout for your body, it’s also
beneficial to your mind and well-being. Strength training has been
shown to decrease stress levels, increase your endorphins and raise
your self-confidence.
  Combined with a healthy eating plan and HIIT, strength training
will give you long-lasting improvements to your body. You will look
good and feel great.
  The following training routines are for beginning, intermediate
and advanced levels of fitness.
  We firmly believe that equipment and machines aren’t just for
people who have been gym-goers for years; quite the opposite in
fact. If you’re a beginner, don’t be put off, ask for advice and then
get stuck in.

Beginner workout
3-Day Training Week
Day 1: Lower body (legs & abs)
Day 2: Upper body
Day 3: Full body

Intermediate workout
4-Day Training Week
Day 1: Hamstrings, back & biceps
Day 2: Chest, triceps & shoulders
Day 3: Legs
Day 4: Chest, back & arms

Advanced workout
5-Day Training Week
Day 1: Legs & back
Day 2: Chest & shoulders
Day 3: Back & arms
Day 4: Legs & abs
Day 5: Full-body



                                   TIP



                     If you have just joined a gym, or it’s
                   your first time using the equipment,
                don’t be afraid to ask for advice and help
                from one of the resident trainers – that’s
                   what they are there for! And do seek
                  advice on what weight to use; there is
                  nothing worse than hurting yourself on
                 the first day by using something that it is
                             too heavy for you.
Beginner workout day 1: lower body (legs & abs)




EXERCISE 1: QUAD EXTENSION
With your legs just within a shoulder width apart utilise the full
range of motion you can comfortably achieve.

Squeeze through your quads at the peak and control the downward
portion of the lift.

Keep your body still, with back and shoulders against the pads.




EXERCISE 2: HAMSTRING CURLS
Push your back and shoulders against the pads, keeping the natural
arch in your spine.

Ensure the base of your quads are against the pivot pad, legs
shoulder width (or within) apart.
Squeeze through your hamstrings and draw your heels to your bum.
Keep your body still, firmly grasping the handles.
EXERCISE 3: LEG PRESS
Start with your back and shoulders against the pads and a neutral
spine. Place your feet flat on the plate, shoulder width apart,
pointing slightly outwards.

Push away from the plate until your legs are fully extended – avoid
locking out your knees.
Control the return phase, utilising the range of motion that is
comfortable.




EXERCISE 4: GOBLET SQUATS
Set the feet just beyond shoulder width and grip a dumbbell as
shown, pressed into the chest with your shoulders back.
Sink down as low as comfortably possible with the weight through
your heels and back straight.

Drive upwards to standing, pressing evenly through the feet. Ensure
you are balanced and repeat.
EXERCISE 5: CRUNCHES SUPERSET TO RUSSIAN TWISTS
Lie flat on your back with the knees drawn towards you and feet flat
on the floor.
Move the shoulders off the ground by flexing the spine, squeezing
through the abs.

Slowly reverse the move, touch the head to the floor gently and
repeat.

                                  //

Assume the top of a sit-up position but with your feet raised from
the floor, elbows locked by your sides.

Grip a medicine ball/plate weight; twist from your core, move your
torso and head in unity to one side, return to the centre then to the
other side.

Avoid bouncing the weight and keep your legs pointing forwards.
EXERCISE 6: PLANKS
Place your forearms flat on the floor with your elbows just within
and directly below your shoulders.

Your body should be in a straight line from head to toe with your
neck neutral.

Keep your core tight throughout and your breathing regular.
Keep your core tight throughout and your breathing regular.
Beginner workout day 2: upper body




EXERCISE 1: LATERAL PULLDOWN
Take an overhand grip just outside your shoulder width.
Initiate the movement by contracting your scapula down and into
place, then draw the elbows close past the sides until the bar
touches just below your collarbone.
Maintain a small arch in the lower back and stretch the back at the
peak by pushing upward slightly.




EXERCISE 2: SEATED CABLE ROW
Use a close-grip attachment with the hands facing each other.
Leaning back slightly with a slightly arched lower back, draw the
attachment directly back into your belly button.

Squeeze through your back at the peak of the contraction. Feel a
stretch through the back before returning to the start; repeat.
EXERCISE 3: DUMBBELL HAMMER SHOULDER PRESS
Take a dumbbell in each hand with a hammer grip– palms should
face each other, and knuckles face upwards.

Start with the dumbbells slightly forward from your front delt, push
directly upwards and squeeze through your shoulders.

Avoid locking your elbows, return in a controlled manner. Keep your
elbows from flaring out.
EXERCISE 4: DUMBBELL LATERAL RAISES
Lean slightly forward. Lead with the elbow in these raises to
prevent you swinging the weight up from your hands – dumbbells
should be just above your shoulders at the peak of each rep.
EXERCISE 5: DUMBBELL CHEST PRESS
Lay on your back on a flat bench, with the dumbbells above your
chest and arms extended.

Move the dumbbells away from each other and downwards, until
the elbow is level with the shoulders.

Press back up and together at the peak, before balancing and
repeating.
EXERCISE 6: BICEP CURLS
With your palms facing forwards, keep your elbows locked by your
side.

Fully extend your arms at the bottom of the rep but keep the tension
in your biceps.

Focus on controlled concentric/eccentric movements with a strong
bicep contraction at the top of the rep.
EXERCISE 7: PRESS UPS
Start with your hands slightly wider than your shoulders, arms
fully extended.

Focus on keeping your body flat throughout the rep. Your elbows
should stay close to your body, your chin almost touching the
ground at the bottom of each rep. Push your body upwards.

Avoid locking out your elbows at the peak of the rep.

EASIER OPTION
perform on your knees
HARDER OPTION
full press up
Intermediate workout day 1: hamstrings, back,
biceps




EXERCISE 1: STIFF-LEG DEADLIFTS
Stand with feet 20–30cm apart with feet beneath the bar.

As you lower the weight bend your knees slightly, pivoting from the
hips and keeping your back straight. When you feel a stretch in your
hamstrings, this is the bottom of the rep.

Lift the bar by extending through your hips until standing upright.
Pull shoulders back slightly if rounded. Extend knees at top if
desired.
EXERCISE 2: HAMSTRING CURLS
Push your back and shoulders against the pads, keeping the natural
arch in your spine.
Ensure the base of your quads are against the pivot pad, legs
shoulder width (or within) apart.

Squeeze through your hamstrings and draw your heels to your bum.
Keep your body still, firmly grasping the handles.




EXERCISE 3: LATERAL PULL DOWN
Take an overhand grip around 30cm outside your shoulder width.
Initiate the movement with your lats rather than your biceps –
sitting up straight, pull the bar down until it touches your upper
chest.




EXERCISE 4: SINGLE-ARM DUMBBELL ROW
Select a flat bench and dumbbell, and then place one leg on the
bench and brace with your arm.

Keeping your back flat and body still, draw your elbow up and
backwards – drawing the dumbbell towards your hip.
Squeeze your back before lowering until you feel a stretch through
your back and repeat.
EXERCISE 5: STRAIGHT-ARM PULL DOWN
Using the rope attachment, push the weight downwards before
drawing it towards your hips and squeezing your shoulders back.

Assume a 45-degree angle of your body to the ground throughout,
with your knees slightly bent and body still.

Squeeze your back at the base, and feel a stretch at the peak.
EXERCISE 6: DUMBBELL HAMMER CURLS
Keep elbows in tight beside your body. At the peak of the rep there
should be a 45-degree angle between your upper arm and forearm,
squeezing through the bicep.
EXERCISE 7: ZOTTMAN CURLS
Stand tall with good posture and your palms facing forwards.

Curl to the peak of the rep by flexing your elbows, and then rotate
the dumbbells so your palms face away from your body.

Lower the dumbbells slowly, and when you reach the base turn the
dumbbells again so that your palms face away, and repeat.




EXERCISE 8: REVERSE BARBELL CURLS
Take an overhand grip of the bar with your hands shoulder width
apart, keeping your elbows close by your sides.

Fully extend your elbows at the bottom of the rep.
Focus on a strong upward and controlled downward movement,
with a strong contraction through your biceps at the top of the rep.
Intermediate workout day 2: chest, triceps &
shoulders




EXERCISE 1: BENCH PRESS
Take a comfortable, slightly wider than shoulder width, grip on the
bar. Un-rack the bar safely to the starting position before lowering
until it touches your nipples/sternum.

Breathe in and push directly upwards – through your chest rather
than shoulders.

Avoid locking out your elbows at the peak of one movement.




EXERCISE 2: ARNOLD PRESS
Select a weights bench 1–2 notches off vertical and sit with good
posture, with your palms facing your chest.
Push the dumbbells upwards, and draw your elbows outwards
throughout so that your palms face forwards at the peak.
Control the descent and reverse the movement before repeating.
EXERCISE 3: INCLINE DUMBBELL FLYES
Set the bench to a 15–30 degree incline. Start with your arms
extended, dumbbells above your chest with palms facing each other.

Lead the movement from your hands, while keeping your elbows in
line with your shoulders.
Go as low as comfortably possible while maintaining form. Control
the upwards phase by contracting your chest.
EXERCISE 4: DUMBBELL LATERAL RAISES
Lean slightly forwards. Lead with the elbow in these raises to
prevent you swinging the weight up from your hands – dumbbells
should be just above your shoulders at the peak of each rep.
EXERCISE 5: EZ BAR SKULL CRUSHERS
Keep your elbows directly above your shoulders throughout the rep
– do not allow them to bow outwards or move down towards your
hips.

Start with straight arms, flexing at the elbows – stop the bar at your
hairline at the base of each repetition.
Squeeze through your triceps on the upward phase until the elbows
extend fully.
EXERCISE 6: TRICEP PULL DOWNS
Use a flat bar attachment on a high cable. Stand tall and keep your
elbows in throughout.

Start with a 90-degree angle at your elbows, draw the attachment
down towards your crotch and fully extend your triceps at the peak
of the movement.

Control the return to the start position and repeat.




EXERCISE 7: TRICEP KICKBACKS
Select a pair of dumbbells. Take up a shoulder-width stance and get
your body as parallel to the floor as possible, while keeping the
back flat.
Keep your elbows high, and upper arms parallel to the ground,
before extending and flexing your elbows simultaneously.
Control the speed throughout and maintain your posture.
Intermediate workout day 3: legs & abs




EXERCISE 1: STIFF-LEG BARBELL DEADLIFTS
Stand with feet 20–30cm apart with feet beneath the bar.
As you lower the weight bend your knees slightly, pivoting from the
hips and keeping your back straight.

When you feel a stretch in your hamstrings, this is the bottom of the
When you feel a stretch in your hamstrings, this is the bottom of the
rep. Lift the bar by extending through the hips until standing
upright. Pull your shoulders back slightly if rounded.
Extend your knees at the top if desired.




EXERCISE 2: QUAD EXTENSION
With your legs just within or shoulder width apart, utilise the full
range of motion you can comfortably achieve.

Squeeze through your quads at the peak, and control the downward
portion of the lift.

Keep your body still, and back and shoulders against the pads.




EXERCISE 3: BARBELL SQUATS
Place your feet shoulder width apart, with the bar across your
traps, grip the bar outside of shoulder width, elbows in.

Break from your hips; your bum should move back and down,
weight through your heels.

Sink to just below parallel, maintaining a strong core and straight
spine – powerfully drive up to standing. Keep looking forwards
throughout.
EXERCISE 4: HAMSTRING CURLS
Push your back and shoulders against the pads, keeping the natural
arch in your spine.
Ensure that the base of your quads are against the pivot pad, legs
shoulder width (or within) apart.

Squeeze through your hamstrings and draw your heels to your bum.
Keep your body still, firmly grasping the handles.




EXERCISE 5: BULGARIAN SPLIT SQUATS
(see here)
Similar stance to static lunges, except rear foot should be on a
bench/box around knee height.

Squat down until front leg is parallel to the ground, keeping tension
through glutes and thigh.
EXERCISE 6: FEET RAISED WEIGHTED CRUNCHES
Assume your starting crunch position, with a weight of your choice
to hand.

Lift your legs into the 90-degree table-top position. Pick up the
weight and, keeping your arms straight, try and push the weight up
to the ceiling, looking up as you go.

Your back should lift off the floor as you go up; lower your back
gently to the floor and repeat the movement.




EXERCISE 7: LYING LEG RAISES
(see here)
Lie flat on a mat with your arms by your side, or beneath the bum if
this is more comfortable.

Lift your feet upwards until the feet are directly above the hips,
Lift your feet upwards until the feet are directly above the hips,
keeping the legs straight.

In a controlled manner return to the starting position, but do not
allow your feet to touch the mat. Repeat.




EXERCISE 8: RUSSIAN TWISTS
Assume the top of a sit-up position but with your feet raised from
the floor, elbows locked by your sides.

Grip a medicine ball/plate weight; twist from your core, move your
torso and head in unison to one side, return to the centre, then to
the other side.

Avoid bouncing the weight and keep your legs pointing forwards.
Intermediate workout day 4: chest, back & arms




EXERCISE 1: BENT OVER ROW
With soft knees and your torso leant forwards keep the back flat
throughout.

Take a shoulder width overhand grip and draw the bar into your
belly button, keeping your elbows close to your ribs.

Slowly lower to the base of the rep, feeling a stretch through the
back before repeating.




EXERCISE 2: DECLINE BENCH PRESS
Opt for a 15–30-degree declined bench and grip the bar just outside
shoulder width.
Lower the bar slowly until it touches the lower chest, before driving
the bar away from you until your elbows are almost fully extended.

Ensure you are balanced and then repeat the move.




EXERCISE 3: LATERAL PULL DOWN
Take an overhand grip just outside of your shoulder width.

Initiate the movement by contracting your scapula down and into
place, then draw the elbows close past the side, until the bar
touches just below your collarbone.

Maintain a small arch in your lower back, and stretch your back at
the peak by pushing upward slightly.




EXERCISE 4: INCLINE DUMBBELL PRESS
Set a bench to a 15–30 degree incline.
Press the dumbbells upwards above your chest, stopping just before
your elbows fully straighten.

Lower the dumbbells until they are level with your chest and in line
with your nipples, before driving them back upwards.
EXERCISE 5: BARBELL CURLS
Stand tall, gripping the bar at shoulder width with your palms
facing away from you and elbows straight.

Keep your elbow still and close to your sides, before flexing the
elbows by contracting your biceps.

Lower the barbell slowly, until your elbows straighten, before
repeating the move.




EXERCISE 6: TRICEP ROPE PULL DOWNS
Keep your elbows by your side, extend your triceps fully – at the
bottom of the rep, twist your hands so the bottom of them are
pointing outwards, while maintaining tension through your triceps.
Advanced workout day 1: legs & back




EXERCISE 1: DEADLIFTS
With your feet flat beneath the bar, squat down and grasp the bar at
shoulder width with an overhand or mixed grip.

Lift the bar by extending your hips and knees to full extension
simultaneously. Pull your shoulders back at the top and push your
chest out.

Reset starting position between each rep.




EXERCISE 2: LATERAL PULL DOWN
Take an overhand grip just outside of your shoulder width.

Initiate the movement by contracting your scapula down and into
place, then draw your elbows close to your ribs until the bar
touches just below your collarbone.

Maintain a small arch in your lower back, and stretch your back at
the peak by pushing upward slightly.
EXERCISE 3: LEG PRESS
Start with your back and shoulders against the pads and a neutral
spine. Place your feet flat on the plate, shoulder width apart,
pointing slightly outwards.
Push away from the plate until your legs are fully extended – avoid
locking out your knees.

Control the return phase, utilising the range of motion that is
comfortable.




EXERCISE 4: SEATED CABLE ROW
Use a close grip attachment with your hands facing each other.

Leaning back slightly with a slightly arched lower back, draw the
attachment directly back into your belly button.

Squeeze through your back at the peak of the contraction. Feel a
stretch through the back before returning to the start; repeat.
EXERCISE 5: HAMSTRING CURLS
Push your back and shoulders against the pads, keeping the natural
arch in your spine.
Ensure the base of your quads are against the pivot pad, legs
shoulder width (or within) apart.

Squeeze through your hamstrings and draw your heels to your bum.
Keep your body still, firmly grasping the handles.




EXERCISE 6: DUMBBELL SHRUGS
Place your feet shoulder width apart, dumbbells by your side, palms
facing inwards and with your shoulders pulled back.
Shrug your shoulders upwards, contracting your trapezius; pause
for a second before controlling the dumbbells during the eccentric
and stretching the traps at the base of each rep.
Keep your head and neck neutral.
Advanced workout day 2: chest & shoulders




EXERCISE 1: BENCH PRESS
Take a comfortable, slightly wider than shoulder width, grip on the
bar. Un-rack the bar safely to the starting position before lowering
until it touches your nipples/sternum.

Breathe in and push directly upwards – through your chest rather
than shoulders.

Avoid locking out your elbows at the peak of the movement.




EXERCISE 2: STANDING DUMBBELL SHOULDER PRESS
Set your feet at shoulder width, with soft knees, squeezing the
glutes and maintaining good posture. Start with the dumbbells just
outside shoulder width.

Drive the dumbbells upwards and then smoothly inward as you
squeeze your shoulder at the peak.

Lower slowly to the start position and then repeat. Avoid locking
out the knees or elbows.
EXERCISE 3: INCLINE DUMBBELL PRESS
Set a bench to a 15–30 degree incline.
Press the dumbbells upwards above the chest, stopping just before
the elbows fully straighten.
Lower the dumbbells until they are level with the chest and in line
with the nipples, before driving them back upwards.




EXERCISE 4: UPRIGHT ROWS
Stand tall and grip the barbell at shoulder width with your palms
facing you, and lean your torso forwards slightly with your back
flat.

Draw your elbows upwards until they are in line with your ears and
squeeze your shoulders back.
Lower slowly until your elbows straighten, and then repeat.




EXERCISE 5: PLATE SQUEEZE RAISES SUPERSET TO FRONT
PLATE RAISE
Select a weight plate and squeeze it between the palms of your
hands to prevent it falling, keeping a constant and small bend at
your elbows.
Maintain this pressure and raise the plate from in front of your
crotch to chest height.

Slowly lower back to the base and repeat (maintaining good posture
throughout).

                                  //

Stand up straight; with your feet shoulder width apart, neutral
spine.

Hold the plate at 3 and 9 o’clock and with straight arms, raise the
plate until your hands are in-line with your shoulders.

Pause for a second before controlling the lowering phase.
Advanced workout day 3: back & arms




EXERCISE 1: LATERAL PULL DOWN
Take an overhand grip just outside of your shoulder width.

Initiate the movement by contracting your scapula down and into
place, then draw the elbows close past the sides until the bar
touches just below your collarbone.

Maintain a small arch in your lower back, and stretch your back at
the peak by pushing upward slightly.




EXERCISE 2: SEATED CABLE ROWS
Use a close grip attachment with your hands facing each other.

Leaning back slightly with a slightly arched lower back, draw the
attachment directly back into your belly button.
Squeeze through your back at the peak of the contraction. Feel a
stretch through your back before returning to the start; repeat.
EXERCISE 3: STRAIGHT-ARM PULL DOWNS
Select a flat bar or rope attachment.

Lean the torso forwards to a 45-degree angle with the floor, arms
extended overhead and your back flat.
Push your hands down and then draw them into your waist. Keep
your arms straight throughout, reverse the arced motion and repeat.




EXERCISE 4: DUMBBELL SHRUGS
Place your feet shoulder width apart, dumbbells by your side, palms
facing inwards and with your shoulders pulled back.

Shrug your shoulders upwards, contracting your trapezius; pause
for a second before controlling the dumbbells during the eccentric
and stretching the traps at the base of each rep.

Keep your head and neck neutral.




EXERCISE 5: BARBELL CURLS SUPERSET TO SKULL CRUSHERS
Stand tall, gripping the bar at shoulder width with your palms
facing away from you and elbows straight.
Keep your elbow still and close to your sides, before flexing the
elbows by contracting the biceps.

Lower the barbell slowly, until your elbows straighten, before
repeating the move.

                                  //

Keep your elbows directly above your shoulders throughout the rep
– do not allow them to bow outwards or move down towards your
hips.

Start with straight arms, flexing at the elbows – stop the bar at your
hairline at the base of each repetition.

Squeeze through your triceps on the upward phase until your
elbows extend fully.




EXERCISE 6: TRICEP KICKBACKS
Select a pair of dumbbells at shoulder-width stance and get your
body as parallel to the floor as possible, while keeping the back flat.

Keep the elbows high and upper arms parallel to the ground, before
extending and flexing your elbows simultaneously.
Control the speed throughout and maintain your posture.
Advanced workout day 4: legs & abs




EXERCISE 1: BARBELL SQUATS
Place your feet shoulder width apart, with the bar across your
traps, grip the bar outside shoulder width, elbows in.

Break from your hips; your bum should move back and down,
weight through your heels.

Sink to just below parallel, maintaining a strong core and straight
spine – powerfully drive up to standing. Keep looking forwards
throughout.




EXERCISE 2: LEG PRESS
Start with your back and shoulders against the pads and a neutral
spine. Place your feet flat on the plate, shoulder width apart,
pointing slightly outwards.
Push away from the plate until your legs are fully extended – avoid
locking out your knees.
Control the return phase, utilising the range of motion that is
comfortable.
EXERCISE 3: STIFF-LEG DEADLIFTS
Stand with feet 20–30cm apart with feet beneath the bar.
As you lower the weight bend your knees slightly, pivoting from the
hips and keep your back straight. When you feel a stretch in your
hamstrings, this is the bottom of the rep.

Lift bar by extending through your hips until standing upright. Pull
shoulders back slightly if rounded.

Extend knees at top if desired.




EXERCISE 4: HAMSTRING CURLS
Push your back and shoulders against the pads, keeping the natural
arch in your spine.

Ensure the base of your quads are against the pivot pad, legs
shoulder width (or within) apart.
Squeeze through your hamstrings and draw your heels to your bum.
Keep your body still, firmly grasping the handles.
EXERCISE 5: QUAD EXTENSION
With your legs just within or shoulder width apart utilise the full
range of motion you can comfortably achieve.
Squeeze through your quads at the peak and control the downward
portion of the lift.

Keep your body still, and back and shoulders against the pads.




EXERCISE 6: CALF EXTENSIONS
Your back and shoulders should be pushed against the pads,
preserving a natural arch in your back.
Place the balls of your feet on the plate, so that your heels are over
the edge, and extend your legs.

Keep your legs straight; push through the ball of your foot to fully
extend your calfs, contracting strongly at the peak.
Advanced workout day 5: full body




EXERCISE 1: DEADLIFTS
With your feet flat beneath the bar, squat down and grasp the bar at
shoulder width with an overhand or mixed grip.

Lift the bar by extending your hips and knees to full extension
simultaneously. Pull your shoulders back at the top and push your
chest out.

Reset starting position between each rep.




EXERCISE 2: DUMBELL CHEST PRESS
Keep the dumbbells in line with your nose throughout the movement
– ensuring elbows stop slightly below your shoulders at the base of
each repetition. Your back should be in a ‘natural straight position’,
not overly arched or completely straight.
EXERCISE 3: LATERAL PULL DOWN
Take an overhand grip just outside at your shoulder width.

Initiate the movement by contracting your scapula down and into
place, then draw your elbows close past the side until the bar
touches just below your collarbone.

Maintain a small arch in your lower back and stretch the back at the
peak by pushing upward slightly.




EXERCISE 4: MILITARY PRESS
Place your feet slightly wider than shoulder width apart (staggered
if preferred).

Grip the bar, hands shoulder width apart, or slightly wider; start
with it touching your chest just below your collarbone.

Press upwards, stopping just before full extension of your elbows.
Control the return phase.




EXERCISE 5: SKULL CRUSHERS SUPERSET TO HAMMER CURLS
Keep your elbows directly above your shoulders throughout the rep
– do not allow them to bow outwards or move down towards your
hips.

Start with straight arms, flexing at the elbows – stop the bar at your
hairline at the base of each repetition.
hairline at the base of each repetition.
Squeeze through your triceps on the upward phase until the elbows
extend fully.

                                   //

Keep elbows in tight beside your body. At the peak of the rep there
should be a 45-degree angle between your upper arm and forearm,
squeezing through the bicep.




EXERCISE 6: BURPEES
Assume a press-up position and jump both feet in, tucking your
knees under your torso, before jumping vertically and extending
your body.

Land softly and place your hands in the same position, before
jumping your feet back out to a start position.

Repeat at a fast pace.
Stretches
Stretching before and after a workout improves flexibility and helps
to avoid injury. But you also run the risk of injury if you stretch
when your body is cold, so do a couple of minutes of light cardio
first; 50 star jumps are just about right to get your muscles warm.

LOWER BODY

Do them at home after leg days and sports such as football, tennis
and swimming, and try to complete them at least once a day – try
doing them in front of the TV or when waiting for the kettle to boil.
  Incorporate them into your lifting routine and see if your
recovery, range of motion (squat depth and form especially) and
conditioning improves.

HAMSTRING STRETCH
1 / From a seated position on the floor, extend one leg out directly in
    front of you and rest it flat on the floor.
2 / Reach forwards towards your foot with both hands until a mildly
    uncomfortable stretch is felt down the back of the extended leg.
3 / Hold for 20–30 seconds.
4 / Relax and sit up for 5 seconds, before exhaling and pushing
    slightly further in the same stretch position, and holding this
    increased stretch for a further 10 seconds.
5 / Repeat the process for the opposite leg.

GLUTE STRETCH
1 / Lie flat on the floor and bring one knee up towards your chest,
    then pull your heel towards the shoulder on the opposite side of
    your body.
2 / Bring the knee of the opposite leg up and apply pressure to the
    ankle until you feel a stretch in the glute area of the adducted
    leg.
3 / You may wish to support the leg, applying the stretching force
    with your arms to increase the stretch.
4 / Hold the stretch for 30 seconds, increasing the stretch slightly
    for the duration.
5 / Repeat the stretch on the other side.

GROIN STRETCH
1 / Seated on the floor, bring the soles of your feet together so they
    touch.
2 / Now with both hands pull your feet towards you until your heels
    are a couple of inches from your body.
3 / With your hands on your feet apply pressure to the inside of your
    knees with your elbows, pushing your knees outwards and
    downwards towards the floor until a stretch is felt in your groin.
4 / Hold for 25–30 seconds.

HIP FLEXOR STRETCH
1 / Take an extended lunge position, ensuring your rear knee is
    behind your body, not directly below it.
2 / Keeping your body upright, lean your legs forwards to increase
    the stretch on the hip flexor of your rear leg.
3 / To increase the stretch further lean your torso backwards and
    twist away from the rear leg – you may pull on a stationary
    object for support and/or an increased stretch.
4 / Hold this stretch for 30–40 seconds before switching legs.

QUAD STRETCH
1 / This stretch can be performed kneeling or standing.
2 / Holding your ankle, pull it upwards towards your bum, while
    keeping your knees together and hips level and neutral, and your
    body straight and upright – you should feel a stretch throughout
    the quad.
3 / To increase the stretch lean your torso backwards.
4 / Switch to the other leg.

CALF STRETCH
1 / From a press-up position, raise your bum slightly and place one
    leg across the back of the other.
2 / Straighten the working leg and drop your heel towards the floor
    to stretch your calf.
3 / Lower your hips to increase the stretch.
4 / Repeat on the other leg.

ERECTOR SPINE STRETCH
1 / Lying flat on your back, raise your knees until there is a rough
    right angle at your hip and knees.
2 / Holding just below your knees, pull them into your chest so that
    a stretch is felt in your lower back and hip region.
3 / Hold for 5 seconds before releasing the stretch and flattening
    your back for 2–3 seconds.
4 / Repeat this process 5 times.

ABDOMINAL STRETCH
1 / From a press-up position, keep your pelvis on the floor while you
    straighten your arms and look upwards.
2 / Walk your hands towards your body to increase the stretch, and
    away to lessen it. Hold the stretch for 20–30 seconds.

HIP/OBLIQUE STRETCH
1 / In a standing position with your feet just less than a shoulder
    width apart, raise your arms upwards and clasp your hands
    together above your head.
2 / Lean to one side and don’t allow your hips or shoulders to twist,
    you should feel a stretch through your outer hip and oblique
    region on the opposite side to the direction that you are leaning.
3 / Repeat on the other side.


Repeat this routine twice through, and aim to increase the intensity
of the stretches on the second round to a safe degree.

UPPER BODY

Make sure that your body isn’t cold when you perform these
stretches. Take a shower first or do some light cardio. This is a
great stretching routine to incorporate into your training regimen to
allow for improved performance, reduced likelihood of injury and to
generally improve overall conditioning for sport, lifting and day-to-
day activities.
  If you are aware of any injury or condition that a progressive
stretching routine may aggravate, please seek medical advice before
performing the below.

STRETCHING CAT
1 / Assume a four-point crawl position.
2 / Arch your back by pushing your abdomen towards the ground
    and raise your head up/backwards.
3 / Do this until you feel a stretch through the abdominal muscles.

If this aggravates a back/stomach injury please avoid and/or
proceed with caution.

PRONE ABDOMINAL STRETCH
1 / Assume the top of a press-up position and then allow your legs to
    lie flat on the ground.
2 / Walk your hands back slowly towards your body until you feel a
    stretch through your abs.
3 / Keep your upper thighs/hips on the ground throughout.

If this aggravates a back/stomach injury please avoid and/or
proceed with caution.

ANGRY CAT
1 / Assume a four-point crawl position and draw your belly button
    in to your spine.
2 / Round your back upwards, with your head looking at the floor
    below your chest, until you feel a stretch across your back.
3 / Walk your hands in towards your legs to increase the stretch.

STANDING BACK STRETCH
1 / From a standing position, let your torso hang forwards by
    bending at the hip and allowing your spine/back to flex.
2 / Keep your legs straight and allow your spine/back to flex until a
    stretch is felt through your back, hips and glutes/hamstrings.

KNEELING BACK STRETCH
1 / Assume a four-point crawl position.
2 / Take your right hand and draw it under your body until the
    outside of your right elbow is touching your left hand/wrist.
3 / Place your left hand on the top of the right and sit your bum
    down towards the feet until you feel a stretch through the right
    side and base of your back.
4 / Repeat on the other side.
                                     TIP



                      Don’t underestimate the importance
                       of stretching: stretching improves
                  flexibility, blood flow and nutrient supply
                    to your muscles, as well as providing a
                    bit of calm. Trust us – your bodies will
                                  thank you later.


SCAPULA/DELT STRETCH (A)
1 / Assume a standing position and draw your right arm across your
    body so it is horizontal. Place your left palm at the base of your
    elbow.
2 / Keep your right arm straight while retracting your left shoulder
    (pulling your right arm towards your chest) to increase the
    stretch.
3 / Keep your right palm facing behind your body throughout.
4 / Repeat on the other side.

SCAPULA/DELT STRETCH (B)
1 / Assume a standing position and draw your right arm across your
    body so it is horizontal. Place your left palm at the base of your
    elbow.
2 / Keep your right arm straight while retracting your left shoulder
    (pulling your right arm towards your chest) to increase the
    stretch.
3 / Keep your right palm facing away from your body, with your
    thumb down, throughout the stretch.
4 / Repeat on the other side.
SCAPULA/DELT STRETCH (C)
1 / Assume a standing position and draw your right arm across your
    body.
2 / Grip your elbow with your hand in front of your upper abs
    (selecting an overhand grip this time).
3 / Apply pressure across/towards your body with your left hand
    until you feel a stretch through your back/shoulders/traps.
4 / Keep your palm facing behind you and thumb upwards
    throughout.
5 / Repeat on the other side.

HANGING BACK STRETCH
1 / Place both hands on the arm of a sofa or back of a stable chair.
2 / With your feet shoulder width apart allow your knees to bend
    slightly, enough to allow for a small arch in your back.
3 / Push your chest towards the floor (and sit back) until you feel a
    stretch through the lats.
4 / You may also complete this with one arm by gripping a
    doorframe and applying pressure backwards in addition to the
    gravitational downwards hang.
5 / Repeat on the other side.

STANDING TRAPS STRETCH (A)
1 / Assume a standing position with your arms by your side.
2 / Push your right palm towards the floor and tilt your head to the
    left.
3 / Do this until you feel a stretch through your neck/traps.
4 / Repeat on the other side.

STANDING TRAPS STRETCH (B)
1 / Assume a standing position with your arms by your side.
2 / Aim to touch your chin to your sternum and allow your upper
    spine to flex and shoulders to round slightly, doing so until you
    feel a stretch through the entire trapezius (from the base of your
    head to around halfway down your spinal column).

SEATED TRAPS STRETCH
1 / Sit in a wooden dining chair with your pelvis tilted forwards
    enough to allow for good posture to be assumed.
2 / With your chest proud and shoulders held back slightly, grip
    under the edge of the chair seat with your right hand, while
    keeping your arm straight (elbow extended).
3 / Lean away from your right hand and tilt your head to the left
    until you feel a stretch through your neck/traps.
4 / Repeat on the other side.

TRICEP (AND LAT) STRETCH
1 / Assume a standing position and extend your right arm directly
    upright.
2 / Flex your elbow and try to touch your fingertips to your left rear
    deltoid muscle.
3 / Grip your right elbow with your left hand and apply pressure by
    gently pulling your elbow across the rear of your body.
4 / Do this until you feel a stretch through your tricep and back
    muscles. You may lean your torso to the left to increase the
    stretch.
5 / Repeat on the other side.

BICEP STRETCH
1 / Stand at a right angle to a wall or a closed door.
2 / Extend your right arm horizontally outwards from your shoulder
    and place your palm on the wall with your fingertips pointing
    downwards.
3 / Attempt to get the hand flat against the wall while keeping your
    arm fully extended, but if you feel a stretch strongly before this
    do not force it as you may cause damage to your elbow/bicep and
    wrist joint.
4 / Repeat on the other side.

FOREARM STRETCH
1 / Assume a standing position and extend both arms out in front of
    you.
2 / With your right palm facing away from your body, and fingertips
    pointing upwards, grip the fingers/top of your hand and apply
    pressure back towards your body.
3 / Try to keep your elbow straight and apply enough pressure to
    feel a stretch through the forearm.
4 / Repeat on the other side.

SHOULDER STRETCH
1 / Assume a standing position by an open doorway.
2 / Place your right arm on the doorframe.
3 / Keep your upper arm horizontal to the ground and forearm
    (elbow to fingertips) flat on the doorframe.
4 / Step through the door, ensuring your chest stays pointing
    forwards, as if you were walking straight through the door (don’t
    let your left shoulder start to round the door and point towards
    the right).
5 / You should feel a stretch through your upper chest and
    shoulders, and may turn away from the right shoulder to
    increase this.
6 / Repeat on the other side.

CHEST STRETCH
1 / Assume a standing position beside an open door.
2 / Place the base of your right hand on the doorframe and step
    through the door, keeping your arm fully extended.
3 / Turn your torso to the left to increase the stretch (and ensure
    your left shoulder does not turn towards the right).
4 / Repeat on both sides.

PARTNER-ASSISTED CHEST STRETCH
1 / Assume a standing position and place your hands on your lower
    back, with your fingertips touching your lower spine, and
    thumbs hooked over/on top of your hips.
2 / Allow your partner to place their hands on the outside of your
    elbows and apply pressure inwards across your spine.
3 / Let them know when you want them to stop applying more
    pressure, and get them to hold the enforced stretch for 20–30
    seconds.
 There’s a reason Lloyd is wearing sunglasses and holding a coconut. We want
you to embrace the fun side, the happy side and the living-life-to-the-full side of
 getting fit and healthy. Now channel your inner Lloyd: go grab your coconut.
STRONGER
Training your body also means training your mind. We at LDNM
take a holistic approach to working out – it’s not just about what
you eat and how you train, it’s also about getting your mind in the
right space so that negative feelings and thoughts don’t distract you
from your decision to get Leaner, Fitter, Stronger.
  The good news is that you’ve made a positive choice in wanting to
change. Change is such an optimistic idea – you want to change
your body to ensure that it does the things that you want it to do for
as long as possible. You want to feel better in your clothes, or
become more flexible. Whatever your reasons for change, you need
to try to harness that initial optimism so that it carries you towards
your weight-loss or muscle-building journey, whatever road blocks
you meet along the way.
  This chapter will help you do just that.

WILLPOWER VS PERSEVERANCE

A lot of people come to us and say that they’ve tried other diets and
fitness programmes and that they haven’t had the willpower to see
them through. Why should they try something new when clearly
they haven’t managed to finish what they started? In other words:
why should our programme help them when they’ve failed so many
times before?
   This is what the idea of willpower does. If you haven’t been able
to achieve the results you want, you’ve not just failed, you’ve shown
yourself to be ‘lacking in character’. So that’s one more thing to beat
yourself up about.
   Let’s knock that on the head right away. Willpower is a short-
term solution to a short-term problem. It’s not sustainable in the
long run. Perseverance, on the other hand, is kinder. It says ‘If I
haven’t done well today, if I keep trying I may do better tomorrow’.
Perseverance is made up of the small increments of positive actions
you do every day that result in achieving your end goal. Everyone
who’s completed a difficult challenge or a long-term goal did so
who’s completed a difficult challenge or a long-term goal did so
because of perseverance, not willpower.
   Take learning to drive, for instance. Your end goal is getting your
driver’s licence. But remember all the stages that you had to go
through in order to achieve that goal. You had to study for and pass
the theory test. You had to learn to check the mirrors, parallel-park
and take the right approach to roundabouts. Then, when you were
ready, came the test itself. You may not have passed the first time,
but perseverance made you try again. It wasn’t willpower that got
you your driver’s licence; it was perseverance.
   Let’s have a look at why you might ‘fail’ when it comes to weight
loss, and why that has little to do with willpower.
   First of all, diets that restrict you from eating a certain food
group, whether it’s carbs or fat, are doomed to fail. As we’ve said
here [diet section], this is because all food groups have their place
on your plate.
   Secondly, restrictive diets aren’t very much fun. You might find
yourself declining invitations because you’re worried you might eat
or drink more than you wanted. Or you might go out with your
friends and feel miserable that you’re not able to eat and drink what
they’re having. Or you go out and overeat and drink much more than
usual and feel terrible the next day.
   Thirdly, as we’ve said before, human beings are often drawn to
what they can’t have. It’s the ‘pink elephant’ theory. Try not to think
of a pink elephant. Right? We bet you have a pink elephant image in
your head right now. You’ve decided to cut cake completely out of
your diet? We bet you think a lot more about cake than you would if
you allowed yourself a piece of cake now and again. And what
happens when you decide you can’t have something is that – more
often than not – you end up bingeing on it, which makes you doubt
your willpower.
   Thinking of yourself as having willpower is, in the long run, not
very useful. Instead, what you need to do is create conditions that
make it easy for you to follow the programme. This means setting
one clear goal, breaking it up into smaller, more achievable, goals
and rewarding yourself when you meet them, like you did when you
were learning to drive a car. We want you to think in terms of
were learning to drive a car. We want you to think in terms of
perseverance, not in terms of having willpower or not. If you
persevere with something, you keep on with it, even if you’ve had a
day or two when you’ve not followed the programme. That’s fine –
don’t beat yourself up about it – just make sure to keep your final
goal in your sights.

MARGINAL GAINS

The year of the London Olympics, 2012, was when the idea of
marginal gains became part of the public’s consciousness. Bradley
Wiggins, riding for Sky and Team GB, had a phenomenal year,
winning Paris–Nice, the Tour de Romandie, the Critérium du
Dauphiné, and the world’s most prestigious and well-known cycling
event, the Tour de France, becoming the first Briton to do so. He
also won gold at the Olympics, Time Trial and was recognised for
his remarkable achievements by being awarded the British
Sportsperson of the Year.
  Wiggins achieved that success due to the principle of ‘marginal
gains’, which was put in place in Team GB and Sky by sports
director Dave Brailsford. Marginal gains means small improvements
you make across a wide range of areas. Famously, Brailsford
retaught his team to wash their hands more thoroughly in order to
improve their chances of not getting sick. Marginal gains took
British cycling to the very pinnacle of the sport.
  You don’t need to be as committed to the principle of marginal
gains as the members of British cycling, but you can use the idea to
help make small improvements to your lifestyle that will help you
become Leaner, Fitter and Stronger. These could include:
• Instead of watching that TV show you’re not that bothered by,
  spend that time preparing packed lunches for the week.
• Set your alarm half an hour earlier and have a good breakfast that
  sets you up for the day.
• Get off the bus or the Tube a couple of stops from your
  destination and walk the rest of the way.
• Carry a bottle of water with you at all times to remain hydrated.
  It’s also useful to have a drink handy as often the body mistakes
  thirst for hunger.
• Keep healthy snacks in your desk drawer at work to eat when
  you’re feeling peckish.
• Invest in the best pair of training shoes you can afford. Women:
  wear the most supportive sports bra you can find.
• Spend ten minutes in the evening reflecting on your day.




            “ Stop saying ‘I cant’ and start saying ‘I
                              will’ ”


KEEPING UP MOTIVATION

When you start a fitness programme, you’re raring to go. You start
off positively – ‘I’ve got this’ – and it’s easy to make healthy choices
when it comes to food because you’ve got that burst of energy that
comes with starting something new. You’re highly motivated, and
that’s great – you should use that initial drive to push you through
the first stages of your fitness programme.
  But what to do when you’re a few weeks or months down the
track? Do you find your concentration starting to wander? Are you
sticking to your programme as closely as you were in the beginning,
or are you making excuses not to do your exercises or go to the gym?
  You’re not going to achieve the results you want overnight. It’s
going to take weeks or months. You need to find strategies to keep
your motivation high. We know how difficult it is to push through
an hour at the gym when we’re not feeling it, but we also know how
exercise feels when we’re looking forward to it.
  So how do you keep up the motivation?

INTRINSIC VS EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION

Look back on some of your achievements – they don’t need to be
Look back on some of your achievements – they don’t need to be
fitness-based, they can be anything where you’ve needed to put in a
sustained amount of effort over a significant period of time. You
could look at the motivation it took for you to complete your degree,
or finish a personal project. Can you identify what drove you the
most? Was it the piece of paper you received at the end with your
name on it? Was it graduating in front of your friends and family?
Was it the sense of achievement you felt? Perhaps it was all three.
But try to identify what it was that motivated you the most.

INTRINSIC MOTIVATION

Intrinsic motivation means that you are motivated to achieve
because of how it makes you feel inside, or internally. You are
motivated because you like the feeling you get when you reach a
goal. You don’t need an external award or congratulations (although
it’s a nice added bonus) because you know you’ve done well.

ADVANTAGES OF INTRINSIC MOTIVATION
• You’re self-starting.
• You don’t need rewards to get motivated – you can rely on
  yourself.
• Process is important, rather than results, making you more likely
  to stick with you.

DISADVANTAGES OF INTRINSIC MOTIVATION
• You risk becoming complacent and don’t push yourself hard
  enough.
• Success can be harder to measure whether you’re relying on how
  it makes you feel.

HOW TO KEEP MOTIVATION HIGH WHEN YOU’RE
INTRINSICALLY MOTIVATED

If you’re intrinsically motivated, once you decide to work out or
change your eating plan, you should be able to keep to it because
you find motivation within yourself, you don’t need any external
rewards to keep you on track.
  However, make sure that you keep pushing yourself and don’t
become complacent. You could introduce a competitive element to
your training by working out with a friend.

EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION

Extrinsic motivation means that you are motivated to achieve
because of some external rewards, such as money, prizes or praise.
It’s likely that most of us are more extrinsically motivated than we
are intrinsically.

ADVANTAGES OF EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION
• You have a concrete measure of achievement.
• Working towards a reward gives you an added incentive to
  achieve.
• When motivation is low, you’re more able to stick to the
  programme as you know you’ll get a reward at the end of it.

DISADVANTAGES OF EXTRINSIC MOTIVATION
• If you don’t receive the reward or acknowledgement of your
  achievement, it can make you feel bad.
• Results become more important than process, which means you
  can lose motivation if don’t get the results you want when you
  want them.

HOW TO KEEP MOTIVATION HIGH WHEN YOU’RE
EXTRINSICALLY MOTIVATED

Introducing rewards into your training regimen is a great idea to
keep your motivation high. Make both the rewards and the goal
specific. Break up your large goal into smaller ones and reward
yourself each time you hit a goal. Perhaps pop 50p into a piggy bank
each time you work out – when it’s full you can treat yourself to
something you really want. You could indulge in a spa treatment
once you’ve lost a certain amount of weight, or a set of new training
clothes.

CHECKING IN WITH YOUR GOALS

Every now and then it’s a good idea to check in with your goals to
see how you’re doing and where you are on your journey to a
healthier you. Take some time to do this – an hour or so – when
you’re alone and likely to be undisturbed. Now would be a good
time to look at your progress selfies. You’re not just losing fat or
gaining muscle, you’re changing your body shape, and having those
progress selfies are going to help you see how far you’ve come.
  Take some time to think about your goals. If you want to lose fat,
for instance, how much more do you need to lose? Perhaps you had
a set weight goal in mind, but with your new diet and exercise plan,
you realise that your body is looking the way you want it to, and
you decide now’s the time to maintain your current weight. Or,
perhaps, you’re not gaining muscle as fast as you’d like, so now’s a
good time to go over your plan, check your TDEE and your surplus
calories. With your increased activity level, are you eating enough?
Whatever stage you are at, taking some time out to check in with
your goals will help you achieve the body you want.
  We love to see progress shots, so when you’re ready, please share
them on Twitter (@LDN_ Muscle) or on Instagram (@ldn_muscle)
using the hashtag #Leanfitstrong.



                     UPDATE YOUR PLAYLIST



                     This might seem like a trival thing to
                   do, but it’s not. For a lot of us, music
                   provides the rhythm to our training. If
                   you’re bored with your music choice,
                    chances are you may get bored with
                  your training regime. Changing up your
                  your training regime. Changing up your
                  playlist to new tunes or old classics will
                      help keep your motivation high.

                    And don’t forget – you can have as
                   many different playlists as you like –
                  perhaps you have one for legs and abs
                   and another for when you’re doing
                          cardio. It’s up to you!


PLATEAUS

You started off great. You worked hard and stuck to your fitness
and eating programme. You started to see results, you’re motivated
and everything is going well.
  But now you’re a few weeks or months in. You’re still working
hard, but you’re stuck. You just don’t seem to be shifting the weight
or building the muscles as you used to.
  You’ve hit a plateau. A plateau is when you’re putting in the work,
but the results seem to have stalled. Most people hit a plateau
during their fitness journey, but that doesn’t mean that they don’t
suck. The good news is that plateaus are just a stage that you can
move past. They offer you an opportunity to take a look at your
programme and see if it’s still working for you.

HOW TO MOVE PAST A PLATEAU

• Check your food planner and be honest with yourself – are you
  sticking to it as much as you were at the beginning of your
  programme? Is lethargy kicking in because of your food choices?
• Check your training programme – is it time to move up to the next
  level?
• Go for a wider range of exercises – this will hit your muscles and
  body in a different way it isn’t used to, and the change in
  movement should spur you on mentally too.
• Remember to rest, listen to your body and understand the
• Remember to rest, listen to your body and understand the
  difference between DOMS and injury! Take rest weeks off
  completely from weights training every couple of months if you
  feel you need a mental and physical break, and ensure you don’t
  skip rest days.
• Train with a different partner – this is not to say that you have to
  turn your back on your loyal exercise buddy, but mixing it up is a
  great way to get past a plateau.
• Are you getting enough sleep? Insufficient sleep can limit fat loss.
• Check your stress levels. External stress can hamper training and
  your body’s ability to lose fat and gain muscle, so remember to
  make time to relax and decompress.

FITTING FITNESS INTO WORK AND SOCIAL LIFE

Diets that are too restrictive, or workout schedules that are too
strenuous or stringent are unsustainable in the long term as they
are difficult to maintain if you want to go out with your friends now
and again, or even fit in training around your job. It can start to feel
like you’re punishing yourself for not being in the shape you want,
and that’s demoralising.
   We want you to enjoy your new training programme and enjoy
your food. We want you to go out for a meal with your friends
without stressing about carbohydrates. In fact, it’s absolutely
essential that you maintain your social life. We’re advocating a
lifestyle change, not a short-term restrictive diet or overambitious
training regime. Having fun with family and friends is important –
and sometimes that involves meals out, and yes, alcohol. Here are
some tips:

GOING OUT

• Some types of cuisines fit into a healthy diet more easily than
  others. Mexican food, for example, can be very healthy if you cut
  down on the cheese. Choose foods cooked in the tandoori oven if
  you’re going out for an Indian curry. Italian food is great if you
  choose tomato-based sauces rather than creamy ones.
  choose tomato-based sauces rather than creamy ones.
• If you’re running a calorie deficit, eat fewer calories during the
  day, but don’t let yourself get hungry. If you’re too hungry before
  a meal, you’re more likely to binge and go over your calorie target.
• Low-to-moderate intake of alcohol has been shown to have health
  benefits. We think alcohol is fine, in moderation, and obviously
  don’t drink every night or before a workout. Take account of the
  calories in each drink you have and factor them into your daily
  calorie allowance.
• If you do go overboard on food or alcohol, don’t beat yourself up
  about it. Start the next day afresh. As long as you don’t make a
  habit of it, the odd big night out isn’t going to affect your training
  programme too badly.

We know how difficult it is to fit in training around work demands
and long commutes. Here are a few tips:
• Get up early and train in the morning. Early morning is a great
  time to go to the gym as it avoids the peak at the end of your day
  and means that it’s likely you’ll get all the equipment to yourself.
  It also sets you up for the day, and you’re more likely to follow
  your food plan and training programmes if you start your day off
  well. Make sure to eat afterwards – take a protein shake with you
  to drink on your commute to work if you haven’t got time to prep
  food. We aren’t saying that getting out of bed early is easy,
  particularly when it’s dark outside, but just remind yourself – it
  will be worth it!
• There are a couple of downsides to working out in the early
  morning: at the start you may be battling with tiredness, and your
  social life might suffer a little if you’ve been up since 5am, and
  your buddies want to party into the night. Make sure that you
  have something healthy to eat around 2 or 3pm so that you don’t
  hit that wall of tiredness.
• If you can’t work out in the early morning, try getting out of the
  office at lunchtime. If you have a park near by, try some of the
  gymfree training suggestions in the Fitter section (see here).
• If you’ve worked late, you can still fit in some training using our
  suggestions in the Fitter section – try one of the gymfree circuits
  that be done at home.
  that be done at home.



                              REMEMBER



                       The key to a healthy lifestyle and
                  sustainable progress in your health and
                   fitness goals is finding balance in your
                         work, social and home life.


VISUALISATION

Visualisation is a technique used by sportspeople to imagine a
challenge and then overcome it. Jessica Ennis-Hill uses
visualisation to create the image of the perfect technique in her
head; on the night before a match Andy Murray goes to the court
he’ll be playing at and visualises his success. Visualisation is a
powerful tool that can go hand in hand with training. Using your
imagination to show you how it looks and feels to have achieved
your ideal physique can really help you achieve it.

HOW TO USE VISUALISATION

Choose a time and a place where you can relax for a few minutes
without any distractions. Turn off notifications on your phone. Lie
back, or sit, in a comfortable position. Think about your goal. Once
it’s clear in your mind, relax, close your eyes and let yourself
visualise yourself having achieved your goal.

  Where are you?
  What do you look like?
  What are you wearing?
  How do you feel?
  Who are you with?
Try and be as specific as possible. Engage all your senses. Perhaps
you’re on a beach with the wind in your hair, the sun beating down
upon your shoulders and you can smell the sea. Think of what
you’re wearing. Think of yourself as your ideal size, running
towards the water. Or you might think of yourself mountain biking
a course in Scotland or going out with friends to a new club.
Whatever scenario you choose, really try to inhabit it and
experience it through all your senses.



                       NEGATIVE SELF-TALK



                          WHAT IT IS
                              &
                      HOW TO OVERCOME IT
                     Constructive criticism is a good thing;
                   it takes account of your strengths and
                  weaknesses and offers advice to make
                   you better. However, not many of us
                 criticise ourselves constructively. Instead
                       we are too harsh on ourselves,
                   overlooking our strengths in favour of
                 focusing on our weaknesses and blowing
                        them up out of all proportion.

                     Negative self-talk is damaging to your
                 mood and to your motivation. If you are
                 always focusing on your weaknesses and
                  your failures rather than your strengths
                     and successes, then you are setting
                      yourself up to fail in the long term.
                 Remember, we all fail from time to time,
                   it’s not just part of life, it’s also a great
                        tool for learning. But it’s just as
                   important to focus on your successes.
 important to focus on your successes.

       If you find yourself engaging in
negative self-talk, here’s a few things that
you can do to try and squash down that
            super-critical voice.

       Go outside and do some
               exercise.
We don’t mean a full-on HIIT or weight-
 training session, unless that’s part of
  your weekly plan, but a brisk walk
      outside can work wonders.

  Imagine what your negative self-
 talk voice looks like, and make it
    say its criticisms in a funny-
             sounding voice.
   Picture slamming the door on it, or
 forcing it inside a strongbox, locking it
       and throwing away the key.

        Argue with your self-talk.
  If it says something like ‘why bother
    going to the gym? They’re all hard
bodies there; you’re going to look out of
       place’ tell it ‘everyone started
 somewhere, and I’m going to focus on
     myself, my sets and repetitions’.

  Ask yourself whether you would
  say what you say to yourself to
          your best friend?
You wouldn’t, would you? So why say it
 to yourself? Love your imperfections.
   We all have them. And sometimes
they’re the things our family and friends
        love about us the most.
  But most of all, be kind to yourself,
show as much empathy to yourself as
 you do to others, and don’t let the
       negative self-talk win.
TRACKING YOUR PROGRESS

There are many ways to track your progress – from apps that you
can use on your phone, like My Fitness Pal, to going analogue – with
a planner like the one overleaf. It doesn’t matter which kind of
trainer you go for, the main thing is that you are keeping your
fitness goal in sight (and in mind). Here are some templates to get
you started.
Acknowledgements
A special mention goes out to the extended members of our team;
Simon Burden, Joshua Silverman, Richard Bennett, Alex Doddman
(The Food Grinder), Charlotte Parsons and of course Alice Liveing.
You have all been fantastic working partners, and become life-long
friends.

A massive thank you to everyone at Penguin Random House and to
everyone behind the scenes who helped make this book a reality:
Malcolm Griffiths it was an honour to work with you, as always;
Howard Shooter and Moo Jevons you made the whole food shoot the
most awesome experience, your talents are second to none; Justine
Taylor, thank you for your insight and support throughout the
writing process; Kate Wanwimolruk and Becci Woods, your input on
the recipes has been invaluable; Sophie Yamamato, thank you for
your design vision, you have been a real miracle-worker; Caroline
Butler and Jo Bennett, thank you for your marketing and publicity
genius, you guys are amazing; and especially to our publisher and
circus orchestrator in-chief, Morwenna Loughman! The book
wouldn’t be anywhere near the standard achieved without your
hard work, expertise, perseverance and guidance.

Finally, we express our utmost gratitude to our long-suffering
parents, family and friends for their unwavering support from the
humble beginnings of LDNM, right up to the present day. Without
your support network, none of this would have been possible.
Huge props to some of the amazing
people who have transformed their lives
and bodies with LDNM. It is really
important to us that we celebrate every
success – we don’t want to create an
army of clones, we want You to look
like You, the best version of You, and
the You that feels strong in mind and
body. Remember it’s success at any size,
and we want you to celebrate yourself
every step of your journey. Share your
journey with us using #leanfitstrong.
     This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred,
     distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as
   specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and
conditions under which it was purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright
law. Any unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the
 author’s and publisher’s rights and those responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

                                 Epub ISBN: 9781473529984
                                       Version 1.0

                                     10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

                     Vermilion, an imprint of Ebury Publishing,
                             20 Vauxhall Bridge Road,
 London, SW1V 2SA Vermilion is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies
          whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com




          Text © Lloyd Bridger, Max Bridger, James Exton and Tom Exton 2017
Photography © Howard Shooter 2017: here (Tom and James), here, here, here, here, here / ©
             Malcolm Griffiths 2017: here (Max and Lloyd), here, here, here

  Lloyd Bridger, Max Bridger, James Exton and Tom Exton have asserted their right to be
  identified as the authors of this Work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
                                     Patents Act 1988

                                   Design: Maru Studio
              Food styling: Moo Jevons First published by Vermilion in 2017

                                     www.penguin.co.uk

       A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN:
                                      9781785040887

   All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
           recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publishers.

 The information in this book has been compiled by way of general guidance in relation to
    the specific subjects addressed, but it is not a substitute and not to be relied on for
medical, healthcare, pharmaceutical or other professional advice on specific circumstances
and in specific locations. Please consult your GP before changing, stopping or starting any
medical treatment. So far as the authors are aware the information given is correct and up
   to date as at January 2017. Practice, laws and regulations all change, and the reader
    should obtain up to date professional advice on any such issue. The author and the
 publishers disclaim, as far as the law allows, any liability arising directly or indirectly
             from the use or misuse of the information contained in this book.
