Praise for Bodybuilding
“If you’re a fan of the sport, a bodybuilder yourself, or a coach, this book is for
you. Arnold published his encyclopedia of bodybuilding back in 1995, and 23
years later we finally have an evidence-based, scientifically sound, upgraded text
to progress the bodybuilding world forward. Excellent work, Cliff and Peter!”
                                                 Christopher Barakat, MS, ATC, CISSN
                                                            Coach, Educator, and Athlete

“With a bodybuilding guidebook written by Peter and Cliff, you are getting the
input of an academic who specifically researches bodybuilding, and a coach who
has seen it all and knows what works from years in the trenches. Additionally,
both authors have experienced the stage as competitors and can communicate
what it’s like and what skills you need to succeed. This book has it all, both
practical solutions and evidence-based guidelines. I couldn’t recommend it more
highly!”
                                                               Eric Helms, PhD, CSCS
    Coach at 3D Muscle Journey, PNBA Pro Qualified Bodybuilder, and IPF Raw Powerlifter

“Science based with real-world experience, Cliff Wilson makes contest
preparation easy to follow and understand. The bottom line is he gets results.”
                                                                        Donovan Strong
  Strong Physiques, IFBB Pro Classic Physique, PNBA Pro Bodybuilder, and Lifetime Natural
                                                                               Competitor

“I’ve worked with Cliff for almost three years now, and he has literally changed
my life. I came to him at a very unhealthy place, physically and mentally, but he
has completely transformed me in all aspects of my athletic career and my life.”
                                                                          Chelsea Kamody
                          Science Teacher, Physics Professor, and Natural Bikini Competitor

“Unparalleled in its depth and breadth, this is the handbook that expert and
novice bodybuilding coaches and competitors have all been waiting for.”
                                                                    Acadia Webber, MS
      Nutrition and Training Coach at AcadiaFit LLC and PhD Student at University of South
                                                                                   Florida

“Cliff Wilson is the best contest prep coach in the game, period. If you are
interested in learning the most optimal ways to prepare your mind and body for
the stage, then look no further. This book should be your bible if you have any
motivation at all in being the best athlete you can be.”
                                                                   Gary Amlinger
        WNBF Pro Natural Bodybuilder, WNBF World Championship Qualified Athlete, and
                                                                    Physique Coach

“Cliff and Peter have done an amazing job combining science with practicality
to help both beginners and veterans better approach their contest preps.”
                                                       Andrew Pardue, BS, CSCS, CISSN
                                                                Owner of APFitness LLC

“Industry experts Peter Fitschen and Cliff Wilson have joined forces to create
the ultimate educational resource for any competitor, coach, or fitness enthusiast
who wants to learn more about the process of competitive bodybuilding.”
                                                Allison Fahrenbach, BS, CPT, CSCC, CSN
 Nutritionist and Physique Specialist, Owner of AFS Gym, and IPE Figure Pro Natural Athlete

“Prior to working with Cliff, I was taught that during contest prep you can only
eat chicken breast or tilapia with broccoli or asparagus. Cliff has taught me how
to count macros and use a variety of foods to meet my needs during prep.
Variety is the spice of life, even during prep … who knew?”
                                                                          Candice Scott
                                                              IFBB Pro Women’s Physique

“In this book, as with Cliff’s coaching, he leaves no stone unturned and provides
a comprehensive guide to competing that you won’t find anywhere else. I highly
recommend picking up this guide before you start your next prep, whether it’s
your first or fifteenth bodybuilding contest prep.”
                                                                              Chris Elkins
                        WNBF Pro Natural Bodybuilder, Flexible Dieter, and Online Coach

“I have been a competitive bodybuilder for over 25 years, and this is the first
book that truly covers every aspect of the sport of bodybuilding and fitness: how
the sport began and its history, every federation (drug tested and nontested) and
each division within the federations, the evolution of the male and female
physiques throughout the years, and training and nutrition. I was particularly
impressed with the detail in covering competition preparation and how gender,
ethnicity, and a person’s history with weight loss and body fat all factor into how
you can tailor a meal plan to optimize their chances of a successful physique
transformation. This book also addresses the old-school traditions and myths, as
well as present-day practices, and it references current research to show what is
true and accurate versus what is now obsolete. This is a must-have for any and
all fitness athletes.”
                                                                  Philip M. Ricardo Jr.
                     Retired Marine and Multiple World Champion Pro Natural Bodybuilder

“Bodybuilding: The Complete Contest Preparation Handbook is carefully
researched, clearly written, and extremely thorough. Peter and Cliff have created
an invaluable resource for anyone with an interest in bodybuilding. This book
should be required reading for everyone who wants to compete!”
                                                                            Jeff Nipard
  Pro Natural Bodybuilder and Owner of Canada’s Most Subscribed Fitness YouTube Channel

“If you are looking for the most comprehensive guide to contest prep with the
numerous factors to consider before, during, and after your bodybuilding season,
this book is a must-read. These same principles were applied to my contest prep
experience with Cliff Wilson as my coach—leading me to the 2017 WNBF
Overall World Figure Championship. Cliff and Peter are two of the most
talented coaching minds in the bodybuilding world today.”
                                                             Katie Anne Rutherford
Owner of Power Fit Performance, WNBF and OCB World Figure Champion, and Elite Natural
                                                                         Powerlifter

“If you want to win your next show, you gotta work with Team Wilson.”
                                                                       Mike Neumann
                                                                 Owner of Fit Body U

“If you want a thorough guide to getting onstage, start here. Based on science
and impeccably organized, this book will walk you through everything you need
to know to optimize your physique leading up to a show—and how to get even
better after it’s done.”
                                                                    Brian Whitacre
                2015 WNBF Worlds, 2015 IFPA Yorton Cup, Overall Pro World Champion

“Few people find their true purpose in life, but when you find those who have,
it’s something else to watch happen. The amount of passion Cliff radiates is
something you hardly ever see, and because of this he has been able to climb the
ranks to world-class contest prep specialist. Most contest prep coaches who start
to gain notoriety eventually end up a bit blinded by their own ego, but in Cliff’s
situation he has remained just as hungry as day one. When he dispenses
information, you know it’s because he has truly arrived at this conclusion and
not because it fits his flavor of the week. Cliff is self-correcting in his approach;
how many world-class standouts he has coached, and pushed to new levels, is
evidence that his systems work. I would certainly recommend any physique
coach take a moment to learn from a man who has exponentially surpassed what
anyone would classify as a successful contest prep coach resume.”
                                                                      Alberto Nunez
                                  WNBF Pro Natural Bodybuilder and Contest Prep Coach

“From the proper mind-set to your peaking strategy, this book has you covered.
If you are serious about bringing your best to the stage, you do not want to miss
this!”
                                                                        Mikey Weiss
                   PNBA Pro Physique Natural Athlete and DFAC Pro Natural Bodybuilder

“If you want the most thorough guide to contest prep available, this is it. It
covers everything—not just the big stuff like dieting, but even details like
choosing a sanction or choosing a division to compete in.”
                                                                  James Krieger, MS
                                                          Founder of Weightology LLC
(Continued at the end of the book)
      BODYBUILDING
THE COMPLETE CONTEST PREPARATION
           HANDBOOK


PETER J. FITSCHEN, PHD, CSCS
    FITBODY AND PHYSIQUE LLC

       CLIFF WILSON
    TEAM WILSON BODYBUILDING
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Fitschen, Peter J., 1986- author. | Wilson, Cliff, 1984- author.
Title: Bodybuilding : the complete contest preparation handbook / Peter J. Fitschen, PhD,
   CSCS., Cliff Wilson.
Description: Champaign, IL : Human Kinetics, [2020] | Includes bibliographical references and
   index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018045409 (print) | LCCN 2018050257 (ebook) | ISBN 9781492587491
   (epub) | ISBN 9781492571346 (PDF) | ISBN 9781492571339 (print)
Subjects: LCSH: Bodybuilding--Training. | Bodybuilding--Competitions. | Bodybuilders--
   Nutrition.
Classification: LCC GV546.5 (ebook) | LCC GV546.5 .F57 2020 (print) | DDC 796.41--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018045409

ISBN: 978-1-4925-7133-9 (print)

Copyright © 2020 by FITbody and Physique LLC and Cliff Wilson

All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including xerography, photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and
retrieval system, is forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.

This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information
relevant to the subject matter presented. It is published and sold with the understanding that the
author and publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, medical, or other professional services
by reason of their authorship or publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance
is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.

The web addresses cited in this text were current as of October 2018, unless otherwise noted.

Senior Acquisitions Editor: Roger W. Earle; Managing Editor: Karla Walsh; Copyeditor:
Michelle Horn; Proofreader: Leigh Keylock; Indexer: Dan Connolly; Permissions
Manager: Martha Gullo; Graphic Designer: Sean Roosevelt; Cover Designer: Keri Evans;
Cover Design Associate: Susan Rothermel Allen; Photographs (front cover): Courtesy of
Anna McManamey and Sam Okunola; Photographs (back cover): Courtesy of Doug
Miller, Cyd Gillon, Valentine Ezugha, and Nadine Schmidt; Photo Asset Manager: Laura
Fitch; Photo Production Manager: Jason Allen; Senior Art Manager: Kelly Hendren;
Illustrations: © Human Kinetics; Printer: Walsworth

Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

The paper in this book was manufactured using responsible forestry methods.

Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
Website: www.HumanKinetics.com

In the United States, email info@hkusa.com or call 800-747-4457.
In Canada, email info@hkcanada.com.
In the United Kingdom/Europe, email hk@hkeurope.com.

For information about Human Kinetics’ coverage in other areas of the world, please visit our
website: www.HumanKinetics.com

                                                                                        E7401
CONTENTS

Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
Photo Credits

INTRODUCTION Evolution of the Sport of
   Bodybuilding
      Early Physique Competitions
      The Early 1900s
      Pre–Golden Era
      Golden Era
       ▶ Is it possible for bodybuilding competitors to compete in another strength sport
         (powerlifting, for example)?
      The Late 20th Century

 1    The Art and Science of Bodybuilding
      New Divisions
      Drug-Tested Bodybuilding
      Misinformed Approaches to Contest Preparation
       ▶ Many competitors at my gym use methods you do not recommend yet have been
         successful in their competitions. Why should I follow the approaches discussed in this
         book rather than what the guys at my gym are doing?

 2    Sorting Through the Sanctions
      Drug Use in Bodybuilding
      Untested Amateur Sanctions
       ▶ If I am drug-free, can I compete in untested competitions?
      Untested Professional Sanctions
      Drug-Tested Sanctions
       ▶ Are banned substances taken for diagnosed medical reasons allowed in drug-tested
         competitions?
       ▶ If I win a pro card in one sanction, can I compete in professional competitions in other
         sanctions?
3 Breaking Down the Divisions and Classes
   Men’s Divisions
   Women’s Divisions
    ▶ Can a competitor compete in more than one division at a show?
   Final Word on Division Criteria
    ▶ I feel like I may be able to compete in more than one division. How do I choose the best
      division for me?
   Classes
    ▶ Why are there multiple classes within the same show? For example, why are there three
      open men’s bodybuilding classes?
    ▶ Can competitors make a living from prize money earned in professional competitions?
    ▶ Can a competitor compete in more than one class at a show?

4 The Reality of Readiness
   New Competitors
    ▶ As a new competitor attending a competition for the first time, is it important for me to
      attend a competition in the sanction in which I plan to compete?
   Experienced Competitors
    ▶ Would you ever recommend competing with less time between shows?
   Readiness for Contest Prep
   Patience and Time Pay Off

5 Show Selection and Timing: The Secrets of
  Preparation
   Selecting the Right Show
    ▶ What is the best time for me to start contest prep?
   Appropriate Rate of Loss
    ▶ Does my weight need to decrease to get stage-lean?
   Benefits of Longer Prep Time
   Determining Needed Prep Time
    ▶ Do I need to select a show before starting contest prep?
    ▶ Could I achieve stage-lean levels of body fat in less time than you recommend?

6 Fueling Your Physique for Contest Preparation
   Energy Balance
   Caloric Intake
    ▶ What do I do if I fall off my nutrition plan for a day?
   Macronutrients
    ▶ Are high-protein diets safe?
    ▶ Should I be concerned about sugar intake during contest prep?
   Individual Differences in Macronutrient Needs
    ▶ What is the best way to accurately measure my food?
    Fiber
    Vitamins and Minerals
    ▶ Can I have artificial sweeteners during contest prep?
    Meal Frequency
    Protein Timing
    Carbohydrate Timing
    Refeeds
    Diet Breaks
    Monitoring Progress
    ▶ How should a woman handle weight fluctuations due to her menstrual cycle?
    Plateaus

7   Tweaking Your Physique for Contest Preparation
    Increasing Energy Expenditure
    ▶ Should I do cardio fasted?
    ▶ If I am lifting weights and doing cardio in the same workout, which should I do first?
    Resistance Training
    ▶ What is the mind-muscle connection I have heard about?
    ▶ How many days a week should I be in the gym?
    ▶ Do I need to train to failure? If so, should I do it in every workout?
    Monitor the Need for Recovery
    Sample Training Programs

8   The Art of Posing
    Bodybuilding (Men and Women)
    Classic Physique (Men)
    Men’s Physique
    Women’s Physique
    Figure (Women)
    Bikini (Women)
    Posing Routines and T-Walks
    Effective Practice Posing
    ▶ Should I practice the poses while wearing my posing suit?
    ▶ Should I pose in a sauna?

9   The Finishing Touches and Final Preparation
    Posing Practice
    Posing Music
    Posing Suit
    Shoes
    Jewelry
    Hair Removal
       Tanning
       ▶ Do all competitions allow the same type of tan?
       ▶ Do I need to get a base tan in a tanning bed before my competition?
       Makeup and Hair
       Other Logistical Details
       ▶ When should I register for a show?

10    Peak Week Explained
       Peak Week
       Prerequisites for Effective Peaking
       Terminology and Definitions
       Peak Week Objectives
       Peak Week Objective Nonstarters
       Carbohydrates
       Water
       ▶ Would you ever recommend that a competitor cut water during peak week?
       Sodium-Potassium Balance
       Peaking Network
       Peak Week Strategies
       Learning Your Load Look and Choosing a Peaking Strategy
       Peak Week Training
       Peak Week Cardio
       Managing Your Physique on Show Day
       ▶ What if I mistime my sodium, sugar, and pump up backstage, and I am too early?
       The Perfect Peak?

11    Contest Weekend: Strategizing for Success
       Focus on What You Can Control
       The Day Before the Show
       Show Day
       ▶ How ready should I be when I arrive at the venue on show day?
       ▶ Can I go out to eat after prejudging?
       After the Show

12    After the Event: Recovery and Recommendations
       Postshow Analysis
       Competing in Multiple Shows
       Physiology of Being Stage-Lean
       Transitioning to the Off-Season
       ▶ Does everyone need to regain body fat after a show?

Epilogue
References
Index
About the Authors
More Praise for Bodybuilding
Earn Continuing Education Credits/Units
FOREWORD

Because I am a competitor, I always like to see what kind of “secrets” will be
revealed in books like this. (It’s the nature of a bodybuilder, I guess!) I also look
for how the explanations needed to give you your foundational knowledge are
presented. Is the book understandable, or a collection of big words meant to
impress you with how smart the authors are? I’m happy to say this book is easy
to understand, and it does an incredible job of walking you through key concepts
such as proper sodium and potassium levels, building metabolic capacity, protein
requirements, and so on. I think it’s a great reality check as well, as to costs
associated with competing and the time it takes to build a championship
physique. While this seems commonsense, it is not and needs to be discussed up
front. I could go on and on about all the great concepts covered, but suffice to
say this book gets two big thumbs up from me! Well done, Cliff and Peter!
—John Meadows
PREFACE

The popularity of bodybuilding is at an all-time high, and the sport is continuing
to grow. This increase in the number of competitors has allowed both of us to
work as full-time contest prep coaches. Throughout our careers, we have noticed
similar questions from nearly every competitor. Some of these questions are
about nutrition and training during contest preparation. Others are related to
additional factors involved in competing, such as where to find shows, what type
of tan to use, what happens on show day, and several other topics. These
questions are not unique to beginners. Experienced competitors looking to
improve their contest placing also ask these questions.
    Currently, there is no single resource that sufficiently answers these questions
in detail, so we answer many of the same questions repeatedly. Furthermore,
many competitors do not work with an experienced coach who can provide this
information. These individuals often rely on information they can find online or
passed down in their gym. In many cases, this leads to suboptimal approaches, a
physique not ready to step onstage, and a poor placing.
    This book provides a comprehensive overview of the bodybuilding contest
process, from the start of preparation through show day and into the transition to
the off-season.
    The book is divided into three sections. The first focuses on bodybuilding
background. When most people think of bodybuilding, they think of Arnold
Schwarzenegger. The bodybuilding division that Arnold competed in is still a
major part of the sport; however, several new competitive divisions are now
offered at contests for both men and women. Discussion of these new divisions
is a unique aspect of this book.
    The second section of this book focuses on the process of obtaining a stage-
ready physique. This section provides an evidence-based approach for contest
preparation and combines scientific literature with our experience. In addition to
discussing nutrition and training techniques, we give attention to important
topics such as determining when a person is ready to begin preparing for a
competition.
    The final section covers many less-discussed aspects of contest preparation
that add the finishing touches to a competitor’s physique. This includes posing,
peak week, tan, and several other topics that help a competitor bring a polished
physique to the stage.
    Another unique component to this book is that we discuss what to do after the
show. Most resources on bodybuilding provide guidance on how to look the best
onstage but rarely mention the postcontest period. As a result, many competitors
are confused about this period and end up gaining significant amounts of body
fat, which rapidly leads to physiological and psychological issues. Therefore, we
provide detailed guidance on how to handle the period after a contest.
    The content of this book is beneficial for any competitor, from beginner to
advanced. Our goal is to provide a comprehensive approach to guide beginners
through their first contests from start to finish. However, we also address less
common topics to help an experienced competitor improve onstage. Ultimately,
our goal is to make this book the most comprehensive guide to bodybuilding.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

A project of this magnitude would not have been possible without help from
several people. Thank you to my coauthor, Cliff Wilson, for embarking on this
journey with me. It has been a great experience collaborating with you on this
project. I thank Human Kinetics for their support in all aspects of this project.
Thank you also to all of the athletes and photographers who allowed us to use
your images in our book.
   Thank you to everyone who, early in my training career, took time to answer
questions from a 125-pound, inquisitive teenager looking to learn more about
bodybuilding. Thanks to Dr. Layne Norton for being a mentor to me early in my
bodybuilding career and getting me interested in the science of bodybuilding. I
also thank my advisors in graduate school, Dr. Margaret Maher and Dr. Kenneth
Wilund, for all their knowledge and support during my formal education.
   To all my clients over the years, thank you for putting your trust in me as
your coach. Without you, none of this would have been possible. This book is
the product of my experiences working with all of you.
   I thank my wife, Amy, for supporting my endeavors in academics,
bodybuilding, and coaching and the long hours associated with writing this
book. Thanks to all my family and friends, both inside and outside the
bodybuilding world. I greatly appreciate the support you have given me and
could not have done this without you.
   —Peter J. Fitschen, PhD, CSCS

The results of this book are the product of the hours that went into writing it and
the years that allowed me to obtain all the information and experience I needed
to write it. For that reason, I need to thank many people for helping my growth
and development. First, I need to thank my coauthor, Peter Fitschen. You have
been not only a great colleague but also a great friend. It has been a pleasure
creating this with you.
    I want to thank Katie Wilson for all she has done for me over the years to
help me become who I am today, trusting in my vision and always having faith
in me. You always supported me and had faith in what I was trying to do. None
of this would have been possible without you.
    To my dad for being a constant source of wisdom and council, to my mom for
always believing in my abilities, and to my grandma for always giving selflessly
to make sure I was not in need. I am eternally grateful. Thank you to my little
brother, Chad, for being not only a great source of motivation but also a great
friend as you have grown.
    Thank you to Haley Clevenger for being my support system while I put in
long hours finishing this book, caring for me even when I forget to care for
myself and putting me back on track to being the man I know I am capable of
being.
    I also need to thank all the clients who have ever put their trust in me as a
coach, particularly those who trusted me early in my career when I was still a
very unproven commodity. It is because of you that I can do what I love every
day.
    —Cliff Wilson
PHOTO CREDITS

Page x: Courtesy of John Meadows.
Pages 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 97, 99, 101, 103, 105, 107, 109, 113,
  115, 117, 119, 121, 145, 147, 149, 155: Courtesy of Liquid Spectrum
  Photography.
Pages 18, 19, 129: Courtesy of Milo Murphy.
Pages 26, 27: Photo by Gary Phillips.
Pages 96, 100, 108, 112, 120: Courtesy of WNBF Professional Natural
  Bodybuilder Gary Amlinger.
Pages 98, 102, 110, 116, 118: Courtesy of Doug Miller. Photo by John Frazer.
Pages 104, 106: Courtesy of Eric Lipton.
Page 111, 139, 143, 159: Courtesy of OCBonline.com.
Page 114: Courtesy of Corbin Pierson.
Pages 123, 125, 127: Courtesy of Bo Flores Photography.
Page 131: Courtesy of Torre Washington.
Pages 133, 135, 137: Courtesy of Jason Theobald. Photo by Otis Wilson.
Page 136: Courtesy of Chris Salgado.
Page 141: Courtesy of Justin Williams.
Pages 151, 153, 157: Courtesy of Andrea Jordan. Photo by Bo Flores
  Photography.
Page 161: Courtesy of Kathryn Rutherford.
Page 163: Courtesy of Allison Fahrenbach. Photo by Bo Flores Photography.
Page 165: Courtesy of Leslie Franklin. Photo by Doug Janz Photography.
Pages 167, 169: Courtesy of Anna de Leon.
Page 222: Peter J. Fitschen. Photo by Rae’s Photography.
                    INTRODUCTION
Evolution of the Sport of Bodybuilding



Bodybuilding as we know it today developed from the long history of
weightlifting. The first gymnasiums were established in ancient Greece. These
gyms were significantly different than modern gyms. Athletes primarily trained
for the events in which they competed as opposed to training for muscle size.
There is also record that in India, as far back as the 11th century, dumbbell-like
weights made of stone were lifted by those looking to enhance health and
strength. This goes to show how instinctual it is for human beings to gravitate
toward developing strength and athletic ability.
   In the 19th century, it was believed that individuals would become “muscle
bound” to the point where their muscles would literally lock up if they got too
big. Despite this pervasive mainstream belief, strongman events gained
popularity. These events typically involved two men challenging each other at
various feats of strength. Events ranged from things like lifting weights and
stones to pulling carts and even lifting animals. There were no real sanctions or
awards for these events. Strongmen would travel from town to town challenging
other strongmen often with nothing more than pride as the prize. However, these
types of competitions remained popular until around the 1930s.
   The winner of these events was the man who lifted more weight. Physiques
were not judged, and the average strongman did not have a physique like
bodybuilders stepping onstage today. Competitors did not focus on diet, and as a
result, strongmen had relatively high body fat percentages.
EARLY PHYSIQUE
COMPETITIONS
Eugene Sandow was the first professional strongman who looked different than
the rest. Unlike other strongmen of the time, he focused on his diet and paid
attention to what he ate. As a result, he was leaner, had more muscle definition,
and looked more like what we would consider a bodybuilder today. Along with
competing in strongman events, he also began doing muscle exhibitions that
resemble today's posing routines. Over his career, he traveled around the world
and created an industry around building a physique. He sold barbells and
dumbbells and is credited with developing the first exercise machine. He also
created Magazine of Physical Culture that focused on building a muscular
physique.
   Later in his career, he began hosting competitions where men would compete
based on physical appearance in addition to feats of strength. In 1901, he hosted
the Great Competition at Royal Albert Hall in London. Sandow advertised the
competition for three years in his magazine, and competitors had to have placed
in a regional event to compete. Competitors wore a black jockey belt, black
tights, and leopard skins, a far cry from the posing trunks worn onstage today.
   The Great Competition winner received the equivalent of $5,000 at the time
and a gold trophy cast with an image of Sandow himself. The second- and third-
place winners received a silver and bronze trophy, respectively. Interestingly, the
Sandow trophy given to the Mr. Olympia winner today is a bronze replica of the
trophy given to the third-place Great Competition winner. It is said that the gold
trophy was destroyed during the World Wars; however, the bronze statue
resurfaced as a prize for the 1950 Mr. Universe competition in London and was
won by Steve Reeves, an American. The trophy would not be used again until a
replica was given to the 1977 International Federation of Bodybuilding and
Fitness (IFBB) Mr. Olympia competition winner. Each Mr. Olympia winner
since has received a replica of the bronze Sandow Trophy given to the third-
place winner at the Great Competition in 1901.
   While Eugene Sandow was starting the physical culture movement in the
United Kingdom, Bernarr MacFadden was doing the same in the United States.
In 1904 he promoted the “most perfectly developed man in the world”
competition at Madison Square Garden in New York with a prize of $1,000.
Like the competitions Sandow was promoting, McFadden’s competitions
required athletes to lift heavy objects in addition to having their physiques
judged onstage.


THE EARLY 1900S
During the early 1900s, knowledge about building muscle and bodybuilding was
still in its infancy, but many were realizing that weightlifting could play a large
role in sculpting a muscular and lean physique. The number of competitions
increased, and these competitions required both athletic events as well as visual
or physique components. Charles Atlas was the most famous bodybuilder in the
world during this time and was widely featured in the Magazine of Physical
Culture.
    Unlike today, where bodybuilders lift weights to prepare for competition,
competitors came from a variety of backgrounds such as wrestling, gymnastics,
or weightlifting. However, it was becoming increasingly clear that weightlifters
were placing higher in these competitions. As a result, by the 1920s, barbells,
dumbbells, and other exercise devices were sold around the world. By the 1930s,
the number of gyms began to increase as well.
    In the early years of competitions, competitors were asked to perform a wide
array of “lifts” (often called exercises), but very few records were kept of
poundage moved in competition. However, in 1911 the British Amateur
Weightlifting Association was founded to begin collecting records for 42
different lifts. These lifts included the deadlift, overhead press, supine press (an
early version of a bench press where the athlete lay on the ground), deep-knee
bend (an extremely deep squat often performed for reps), upright row, several
single-arm dumbbell lifts, and many others. In the United States, similar
organizations formed over the next two decades to begin registering records.
    In 1920, the number of lifts primarily performed in strength competitions
were reduced when Olympic weightlifting was limited to three main lifts: snatch,
overhead press, and clean and jerk. All the other lifts became known as the odd
lifts. The early versions of the big three (squat, bench, and deadlift) performed in
powerlifting meets today were considered odd lifts. Many bodybuilders still used
many of the odd lifts in training and included exhibitions of them at competition,
although these lifts were not included in Olympic weightlifting.
PRE–GOLDEN ERA
The period between 1940 and the mid to late 1960s is often called the pre–
golden era or silver era of bodybuilding because it precedes the golden era (the
late 1960s through early 1980s). The start of this period is often considered the
1940 American Athletic Union (AAU) Mr. America competition, referred to as
the first real modern bodybuilding event. Competitors in the Mr. America
competed in both weightlifting and posing. For an athlete to win, he needed to
excel in both endeavors. The weightlifting component heavily focused on the
Olympic lifts at this time.
    Muscle beach also became popular in the 1940s. It was an outdoor gym
where athletes lifted weights, did gymnastics, and performed strength events
such as bending steel rods and tearing phone books as people watched. There
was also an increase in the number of beach contests consisting of a combination
of bodybuilding, strength competitions, and gymnastics along the coasts of
Southern California.
    Most competitors of this era trained only three days a week (Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays) because these were often the only days the gym was
open. Workouts were full body each day, with each muscle group trained three
times weekly. Some gyms during this period were open to women on Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Saturdays. However, this was a period of gender segregation for
physical fitness and exercise. In fact, many major universities at this time had
separate gymnasiums for men and women. (This includes the University of
Illinois; during Peter's graduate studies there, his research lab was in the former
women's physical fitness building.)
    Steve Reeves was the most famous bodybuilder during this period and is
considered the first truly well-known bodybuilder. Reeves was a successful
competitor, winning the 1947 Mr. America, 1948 Mr. World, and 1950 Mr.
Universe; however, his fame came from the movies he starred in, such as
Hercules. His aesthetic physique and good looks made him popular with a more
mainstream crowd.
    This was also when bodybuilders primarily competed drug-free. The first
confirmed use of steroids in strength sports was at the 1954 World Weightlifting
Competition in Vienna, Austria, by the Soviet weightlifting team. However,
Dianabol, a commonly used anabolic steroid, did not become available until
1958 and did not begin to appear in bodybuilding circles until the 1960s. Many
mark this appearance of drug use within the sport as the end of the pre–golden
era of bodybuilding.
   As a side note, people today are quick to accuse anyone with a more
developed physique of using performance-enhancing drugs; however, the high-
level physiques developed without drugs before the 1950s and 1960s clearly
show what can be accomplished naturally. There were some impressive
physiques during this period even though diet and training methods are not as
advanced as today. Both authors encourage readers to focus on their own
progress and goals rather than spending time worrying about what others are or
are not taking to enhance their physiques.
   By the 1950s, bodybuilding popularity was increasing, as were the number of
gyms, but interest in Olympic weightlifting was declining. As a result, the AAU
(which previously focused primarily on Olympic lifts in competition) started
recording odd lift records in 1958. The first powerlifting meet was held in 1964,
and the first national championship was held the following year. The three lifts
selected for these meets were a deep-knee bend variation in which a competitor
only squatted to parallel, a supine press variation performed on a bench rather
than the ground, and the classic deadlift that has remained relatively unchanged.
   The number of sanctions and competitions also increased during this time.
The AAU, IFBB, and the National Amateur Bodybuilding Association
(NABBA) were just a few of the many sanctions that battled for competitors.
Each sanction had a most prestigious title, such as the Mr. America or Mr.
Universe; however, no competition definitively determined the best bodybuilder
in the world. That all changed when Joe Weider promoted the IFBB Mr.
Olympia in 1965, ushering in the golden era of bodybuilding.


GOLDEN ERA
The beginning of the golden era of bodybuilding is typically marked as either the
introduction of drug use into the sport or the first Mr. Olympia competition, both
of which occurred around the mid-1960s. During this period, the popularity of
bodybuilding skyrocketed, and the profitability of gyms increased, leading to
more gyms dedicated to bodybuilders. In 1965, Joe Gold opened the first Gold's
Gym in Venice Beach, California. Since then, Gold's Gym has been franchised
to over 700 locations, and many other successful gym franchises have also
emerged.
   This was also the time when the iconic documentary Pumping Iron was
filmed. This introduced a wide audience to Arnold Schwarzenegger and other
top bodybuilders of the time, such as Lou Ferrigno and Franco Columbo. As a
result, the sport's popularity grew massively.
   During this period, bodybuilding competitions also began to change. Unlike
bodybuilders of previous eras, golden-era bodybuilders began to be judged on
appearance alone and no longer had to also perform athletic events in
competition. Powerlifting, Olympic weightlifting, and strongman became
separate competitions and allowed competitors to specialize in their goals.


 FAQ: Is it possible for bodybuilding competitors to
 compete in another strength sport (powerlifting, for
 example)?
 Many bodybuilders compete in other strength sports in the off-season.
 Competing in a strength sport like powerlifting allows the athlete to focus on
 heavy compound movements that can be a great way for a bodybuilder to add
 muscle mass. However, we would encourage bodybuilders who also compete
 in powerlifting (or another strength sport like Olympic lifting or strongman) to
 add assistance exercises to their training to ensure each muscle group is being
 targeted with enough volume to build a symmetrical physique.

   The ideal physique of the golden era was a large V taper with wide shoulders,
big arms, and big lats that tapered down to a tiny waist. Bodybuilders like
Arnold Schwarzenegger (Mr. America, five-time Mr. Universe, and seven-time
Mr. Olympia) and Frank Zane (Mr. America, three-time Mr. Universe, and
three-time Mr. Olympia) were the epitome of this aesthetic look. To achieve this
look, training transitioned from three weekly full-body workouts to five to six
days a week training a single body part daily with high training volumes.
   During this period, the IFBB's Mr. Olympia competition began to dominate
the competition scene. Bodybuilders wanted to become the best in the world and
that meant winning the IFBB Mr. Olympia. In 1981, the National Physique
Committee (NPC) formed as an amateur affiliate to the IFBB. As a result, most
of the other competing sanctions gradually died off and the NPC/IFBB remains
the primary untested bodybuilding sanction to this date.
THE LATE 20TH CENTURY
As bodybuilding entered the 1980s, the sport began to change. Drug use
increased, and the physiques onstage became larger as the focus of the V taper
began to fade. Many mark the end of the golden era of bodybuilding as 1984
when Lee Haney won his first Mr. Olympia title. He would go on to win eight
consecutive Mr. Olympia titles from 1984 to 1991.
   What made Haney different is that he was significantly larger than previous
Mr. Olympia winners at 5'11" (180 cm) and 240 to 245 pounds (109-111 kg). In
comparison, the Mr. Olympia winners of the golden age were smaller: Arnold
Schwarzenegger (6'2" [188 cm], 225 to 230 pounds [102-104 kg]), Frank Zane
(5'9" [175 cm], 185 pounds [84 kg]), and Franco Columbo (5'5" [165 cm], 185
pounds [84 kg]). Haney's successors to the Mr. Olympia throne, Dorian Yates
(1992-1997) and Ronnie Coleman (1998-2005), only continued to increase in
size. Yates was 265 pounds (120 kg) onstage at 5'10" (178 cm), and Coleman at
his largest was nearly 300 pounds (136 kg) onstage at 5'11" (180 cm). By the
end of the century, bodybuilding in the IFBB had primarily become a mass
game.
   The sport of bodybuilding continued to expand during this time. A number of
women entered the sport, and the first Ms. Olympia was held in 1980. In 1989,
Arnold created the Arnold Classic, which has become the second most
prestigious title in the IFBB and the largest fitness expo in the United States.
   In 1990, the U.S. government made anabolic steroids a class III substance.
Around this time, the interest in drug-tested bodybuilding increased. By the end
of the century, several new sanctions, such as the International Natural
Bodybuilding Association (INBA), National Gym Association (NGA), and
World Natural Bodybuilding Federation (WNBF) began to provide alternative
options to competitors who chose to compete without using drugs. Heading into
the 21st century, the popularity of bodybuilding continued to increase as the
opportunities to compete increased.

Take-Home Points
   ▶ Bodybuilding competitions initially developed from muscle exhibitions
    that accompanied strongman competitions. However, these strongman
    competitions were different from strongman competitions today and
 typically involved one strongman challenging another in various feats of
 strength.
▶ Early bodybuilding competitions involved an athletic performance
 component along with a physique component. Depending on the
 competition, the athletic component had Olympic weightlifting,
 gymnastics, or odd lifts, including early versions of the big three
 powerlifting lifts. Competitors needed to excel at both components to win
 the competitions.
▶ By the golden age of bodybuilding, physique competitions no longer
 included an athletic component, and athletes were solely judged on visual
 appearance. Powerlifting, Olympic weightlifting, and strongman became
 separate competitions.
▶ The desired look of a bodybuilder before the early 1980s was a large V
 taper, small waist, and very aesthetic look. However, by the turn of the
 century, professional bodybuilding in the IFBB had become a mass game.
▶ The popularity of bodybuilding grew throughout the 20th century. By the
 end of the century, there were competitions for women and for those who
 chose to compete drug-free. As a result, more people than ever before
 were competing in bodybuilding.
                                                                               1
The Art and Science of Bodybuilding



In the introduction, our discussion of bodybuilding history left off around the
turn of the century, when Mr. Olympia competitors were becoming larger and
heavier. While “mass monsters” like Ronnie Coleman and Jay Cutler dominated
the early part of the 21st century, this led to the development of new divisions,
and a large influx in competitors as the sport expressed an increased desire for a
more streamlined and aesthetic look. This change can be seen in the physiques of
more recent Mr. Olympia winners and top contenders; fewer were around the
300-pound (136 kg) mark onstage. For example, the physiques of 2008 Mr.
Olympia Dexter Jackson (5' 6" [168 cm], 215 pounds [98 kg]), the seven-time
Mr. Olympia Phil Heath (5' 9" [175 cm], 240 pounds [109 kg]), and 2018 Mr.
Olympia Shawn Rhoden (5' 10" [175cm], 240 pounds [109 kg]) are a stark
contrast to the prior era when the mass monsters were king.


NEW DIVISIONS
The increasing desire for more aesthetic physiques also resulted in several new
divisions. In 2008, the IFBB began to include a 202-pound (92 kg) pro class that
was increased to be the 212-pound (96 kg) pro class in 2012.
   In 2011, the NPC/IFBB introduced the men’s physique division, where
competitors are expected to have muscle mass. However, physiques that are too
muscular are marked down. Similarly, competitors are expected to be extremely
lean, but competitors with overly striated and vascular muscle are marked down.
Competitors in this division wear board shorts and are primarily judged from the
waist up.
    As the demand for a more streamlined look in bodybuilding continued to
increase, the classic physique division was added in 2016. This division was
meant to serve as a middle ground between the physiques in the men’s physique
and the men’s bodybuilding divisions. Successful competitors in the classic
physique division have an aesthetic physique, large V taper, and a similar look to
bodybuilders of the golden age, but they are typically leaner than competitors of
the golden age. The classic physique division also has weight limits based on a
competitor’s height to encourage a more aesthetic physique.
    Male competitors are not the only ones with new divisions in the 21st
century. The women’s side of the sport has also seen rapid expansion. The new
women’s divisions are less extreme than the women’s bodybuilding division to
encourage more females to compete. The first division added was figure. The
first national event was in 2001, and the first professional event was in 2003.
Women in this division are less muscular and not as striated as female
bodybuilders. They also wear high heels and jewelry and are, in part, judged on
femininity. This attracted female competitors who enjoyed weight training but
did not want to push the limits of their muscularity too far.
    In 2010, the NPC/IFBB added the bikini division. Competitors in this division
were less muscular and conditioned than figure competitors were. However, like
the figure division, competitors wear heels and jewelry, and femininity is a
judged component. In contrast, posing is less rigid than the figure division, and
competitors can show a bit more personality onstage. The bikini division has
quickly become the most popular women’s division offered.
    In 2011, the women’s physique division was added. This division fits
between the figure and bodybuilding divisions in terms of muscularity and
conditioning. Competitors do not wear heels in the physique division, but the
posing is more stereotypically feminine than in the bodybuilding division.
    With the addition of two new male and three new female divisions,
competitors now have more divisions to best suit their physiques. The judging
criteria and posing for each division will be discussed in chapters 3 and 8,
respectively.


DRUG-TESTED BODYBUILDING
Over the past two decades, the number of drug-tested bodybuilding competitions
has increased exponentially. This has increased the number of overall
competitors in the sport by providing a level playing field for those who choose
to compete without the use of drugs. Competitors in drug-tested competitions are
typically polygraph- and urine-tested. In addition, some sanctions perform
random off-season testing for professional drug-tested athletes.
   With the increase in competitors participating in drug-tested shows, many
new sanctions have started to offer competitions. In 2018, over 300 drug-tested
competitions were scheduled in the United States. However, these are scattered
across more than a dozen sanctions. In comparison, the NPC (the primary non-
tested amateur bodybuilding sanction in the United States) had over 200
competitions in 2018 alone.
   Each drug-tested bodybuilding sanction has its own professional competition
serving as the most prestigious title. Examples include the WNBF Worlds, IPE
Worlds, OCB Yorton Cup, NGA Universe, PNBA Natural Olympia, and several
others. Chapter 2 includes a detailed list of bodybuilding sanctions.
   The current state of drug-tested bodybuilding in the United States is like
bodybuilding during the pre–golden era, before the first IFBB Mr. Olympia in
1965. The sport’s growth has resulted in several new sanctions, competitions,
and many new competitors, but there is no unity within the sport. However, there
is a strong call from competitors for more unity and a hope that drug-tested
bodybuilding can one day develop a more uniform structure like the NPC/IFBB.


MISINFORMED APPROACHES TO
CONTEST PREPARATION
Historically, information about preparing for a bodybuilding contest was passed
down from competitor to competitor at the gym. Little scientific research had
been performed on bodybuilders preparing for competition, and before the
Internet, there was no realistic way for most competitors to access this
information even if it had existed. Much published research tests the approaches
that bodybuilders have been using for decades. Some approaches have withstood
the test of time, others have been disproven, and many have simply not been
tested in a research setting but appear to be effective in practice.
   Previously, most bodybuilders would prepare (simply called prep) for a
standard of 8 to 12 weeks regardless of how much fat they needed to lose. This
was the way people had “always done things,” so most people followed this
plan. Sixteen-week preps were considered long contest preps, and prep times of
more than 20 weeks were almost unheard of (4). However, research (2) and
anecdotal evidence suggest there may be many advantages to a longer prep time.
In fact, this is such a common misconception among competitors that we
dedicated an entire chapter (chapter 5) to discussing how long to plan for an
effective contest prep.
   Once contest prep started, competitors would often follow set meal plans,
eating the same thing each day. Even in the early 2000s, when we began
competing, this approach was extremely common.
   A contest prep meal plan could look like the following:
   ▶   Meal 1: egg whites, oatmeal
   ▶   Meal 2: chicken breast, green vegetables
   ▶   Meal 3 (preworkout): chicken breast, sweet potato
   ▶   Meal 4 (immediately postworkout): protein shake
   ▶   Meal 5: tilapia, brown rice, green vegetables
   ▶   Meal 6: lean beef, green vegetables
For either a meal or an entire day each week, a competitor would have a “cheat
meal” or “cheat day” when he or she could consume anything desired.
   Although there are many problems with this nutritional approach, one of the
most glaring issues is that it was completely normal for a bodybuilder to
eliminate dairy and fruit from the diet during contest prep. As a result,
nutritional deficiencies were common, with the most typical being calcium and
vitamin D (4). Another issue with such a diet plan is that on cheat days
competitors often undid all the progress that was made during the week by
consuming too many calories. If you are looking at the sample meal plan and
thinking there is no way you could follow it, do not assume that competing is not
for you—an approach this extreme is not only unnecessary, it is also not as
effective as a more moderate approach. Chapter 6 will discuss how to modify
your nutrition for an effective contest prep.
   While traditional bodybuilding dietary approaches have been wrought with
issues, training was no different. It was completely normal for competitors to
switch to exclusively high repetitions during contest prep due to the belief that
this “tones” the muscle. However, this approach commonly results in strength
and muscle loss during contest prep (1). Long durations of steady-state fasted
cardio first thing in the morning were also commonplace, as were cardio
durations of more than 10 hours weekly (7). However, neither of these may be
necessary or optimal to develop a stage-ready physique based on more research
(3), observation, and experience. We will cover resistance training and cardio for
contest prep in detail in chapter 7.
   The final week before a competition is commonly called peak week. In this
final week, competitors often take extreme approaches to drastically alter their
physiques, including cutting water and sodium (4). However, these approaches
may make a competitor’s physique look worse come show day (2). Chapter 10
describes more effective approaches to peak week.
   After a competition, rapid weight gain was common (5). However, research
suggests that gaining weight too rapidly may add to excessive fat gain and slow
the return of hormones to normal levels (6). Therefore, chapter 12 covers how to
transition out of a competition, what to do in the off-season, and why an off-
season is important.
   Through the approaches outlined in this book, our goal is to provide
comprehensive guidelines for contest prep based on research and our experience
as competitors and coaches.

 FAQ: Many competitors at my gym use methods you do
 not recommend yet have been successful in their
 competitions. Why should I follow the approaches
 discussed in this book rather than what the guys at my
 gym are doing?
 A person can use many approaches during contest prep, and some will be
 more successful than others. There is no way to tell whether a different
 approach may have worked better for the competitors at your gym. We
 encourage all competitors to test a variety of approaches to find what works
 best for them; however, we would encourage using the evidence-based
 approaches described in this book as a starting point to developing a stage-
 ready physique. The recommendations provided are a combination of our
 experience as coaches and competitors as well as scientific research.
Take-Home Points
 ▶ In recent years, bodybuilding has had a large increase in competitors due
  to several new divisions for both men (men’s physique and classic
  physique) and women (figure, bikini, and women’s physique).
 ▶ Drug-tested bodybuilding has grown in recent years, giving competitors
  who choose to compete drug-free an option for a level playing field during
  competition.
 ▶ Studies show many common contest prep practices are unnecessary or
  suboptimal.
                                                                               2
Sorting Through the Sanctions



It does not matter if you are new to bodybuilding or a seasoned competitor;
choosing a bodybuilding sanction can be confusing. The growth of bodybuilding
has led to many new sanctions, and they seem to change every few years. To
complicate things further, some sanctions drug test while others do not. It can be
especially difficult for a new competitor to know the difference between the
sanctions. Even within drug-tested sanctions, testing policies may also differ,
and that can make things even more confusing.
   In addition, new competitors may not understand the difference between
professional and amateur competitions and who is eligible to compete at each.
The process of obtaining professional status differs between sanctions. Some
sanctions may accept a competitor’s professional status from another sanction
while others do not.
   This chapter helps you sort through the sanctions so you can select the
competition best for you.


DRUG USE IN BODYBUILDING
While it is a taboo subject, performance-enhancing drugs (PEDs) have been a
part of bodybuilding for over 60 years. It is important to address drug use before
discussing the differences in drug testing between sanctions since it plays into
choosing the bodybuilding federation that best suits you.
   What a competitor puts in his or her body is ultimately his or her own
decision. We do not discourage or endorse drug use in this book but want to help
both those who use drugs and those who do not learn what their options are in
terms of choosing a sanction. Individuals considering using PEDs should discuss
this decision with a physician or qualified medical professional. We encourage
those using PEDs to have routine bloodwork performed by a qualified health
professional.
   We will not discuss protocols for using PEDs in this book. However, all other
contest prep approaches will be applicable, regardless of the sanction chosen.


UNTESTED AMATEUR
SANCTIONS
The NPC is the primary untested amateur bodybuilding sanction in the United
States, and it has over 200 scheduled competitions. Information about the NPC
and its competitions can be found at www.npcnewsonline.com.
   Competitors within the NPC do not need to qualify for regional amateur
competitions, but amateur competitors do not win prize money. However,
competitors can become NPC nationally qualified based on placing at a regional
show. At designated national qualifying competitions, if a male competitor
places in the top two or a female competitor places in the top three of the open
division, he or she becomes nationally qualified. There may be other situations
when a competitor qualifies as well. Consult with the NPC website or NPC show
promoters with specific questions regarding national qualification.
   When a competitor becomes nationally qualified, he or she is eligible to
compete at national-level NPC competitions for one year. Examples of these
competitions include NPC Nationals, NPC Junior Nationals, NPC Universe,
NPC USA, and others. Competitors at national competitions can be awarded
professional status in the IFBB based on placing. Many competitors want to turn
pro and compete in the IFBB. Much like in other athletic endeavors, turning pro
is extremely difficult because the competition is stiff. The number of IFBB pro
cards awarded differs between competitions. Consult with the show information
for each specific national-level show for more information regarding obtaining
professional status in the IFBB.


 FAQ: If I am drug-free, can I compete in untested
 competitions?
 Yes, competitors who are drug-free can compete in untested competitions.
 Competitors in untested competitions are often taking substances that a drug-
 free athlete is not. However, it is well within the competition rules, and a
 drug-free athlete should not blame placing in an untested competition on drug
 use by other competitors.


UNTESTED PROFESSIONAL
SANCTIONS
The IFBB is the primary untested professional bodybuilding sanction worldwide,
and it promotes competitions such as the Mr. Olympia, Arnold Classic, and
many others. IFBB Mr. Olympia winners are usually considered the best in the
world in their divisions.
   As previously discussed, competitors in the United States can qualify through
the NPC. However, international competitors can also qualify through amateur
sanctions in their countries and should consult with those sanctions for details
about how to obtain professional status. More information about the IFBB can
be found at www.ifbb.com.


DRUG-TESTED SANCTIONS
Through most of bodybuilding history, competitions have not been drug tested.
However, as drug use has become more prevalent in the past two or three
decades, the demand for drug-tested shows has increased dramatically. As a
result, many bodybuilding sanctions test athletes before competition, usually
through polygraph and urine testing. Some sanctions have also moved toward
off-season testing of professional drug-free competitors. While there is only one
primary untested bodybuilding sanction (NPC/IFBB), there are currently many
drug-tested federations to choose from.
   Although the banned substance lists differ between sanctions, the substances
that are typically banned are anabolic steroids, growth hormones, thyroid
hormone, insulin, ephedra, clenbuterol, prescription diuretics (herbal diuretics
are typically legal for use), and any other substance that raises testosterone levels
above the physiological range. To avoid issues, we encourage all competitors
considering a drug-tested competition to consult the banned substance list before
signing up. The primary differences in the banned substance lists of different
sanctions are regarding certain over-the-counter supplements as well as the use
of physician-monitored hormone replacement therapy. Just because a
supplement is sold legally over the counter, that does not mean it is
automatically allowed in all drug-tested federations. For this reason, it’s
important to check with your sanction’s guidelines before you use any new
supplement.


 FAQ: Are banned substances taken for diagnosed
 medical reasons allowed in drug-tested competitions?
 Most drug-tested sanctions do not allow testosterone replacement therapy.
 Thyroid hormone and diuretics prescribed for a medical condition may be
 allowed. When in doubt, contact your sanction before registering for the
 competition to avoid any issues.

   Like the NPC, a competitor does not have to qualify for an amateur
competition. Also, just as in the NPC, prize money is not awarded in these
contests. Unlike the NPC, competitors do not need to compete at national events
to obtain pro status. Competitors can obtain professional status in a drug-tested
sanction by winning the open overall in their divisions at a competition
designated as a pro qualifier. Once a competitor obtains professional status in a
drug-tested sanction, he or she can compete in drug-tested professional
competitions for prize money. At this point, most drug-tested sanctions accept a
competitor’s professional status won in another sanction; however, we
recommend asking the sanction in which you plan to compete if there are any
questions.


 FAQ: If I win a pro card in one sanction, can I compete
 in professional competitions in other sanctions?
 Most drug-tested sanctions honor the professional status obtained in other
 drug-tested sanctions. However, the IFBB will not honor pro status obtained
 in a drug-tested sanction. We encourage those who have questions regarding
 professional eligibility to contact the sanction where they plan to compete for
 clarification.

    Table 2.1 provides information about many amateur and professional drug-
tested sanctions. Some smaller sanctions may be omitted. Also, the table does
not include international sanctions. The landscape of drug-tested bodybuilding
has undergone many changes over the years; however, all affiliations and links
listed below are up-to-date at the time this book was written.




Take-Home Points
   ▶ The primary amateur and professional untested sanctions in the United
    States are the NPC and IFBB, respectively. The most prestigious title in
    the IFBB is Mr. Olympia.
   ▶ Currently, there are many drug-tested bodybuilding sanctions. Most
    sanctions have similar drug-testing policies; however, it is always best to
    research the sanction you plan to compete in before entering a
    competition.
   ▶ Amateur competitors in untested or drug-tested competitions typically do
    not have to qualify; however, competitors do not receive prize money. To
win prize money in a competition, competitors must obtain professional
status and place in a professional competition.
                                                                             3
Breaking Down the Divisions and
Classes



In the late 1990s, deciding which division to compete in at a bodybuilding
competition was easy. If you were a man, you competed in men’s bodybuilding,
and if you were a woman, you competed in women’s bodybuilding. In the early
2000s, several new divisions were added. This positive change provides options
for competitors based on preferences and strengths, but it can make choosing a
division more confusing.
   We will clear up some of the confusion by explaining how the three criteria—
muscularity, conditioning, and symmetry (see the Criteria Defined section at the
end of the chapter for definitions)—are judged in each division. The ideal look
for each division differs.

Division Finder
NAME                                        PAGE NUMBER
Men’s bodybuilding                          16
Classic physique                            18
Men’s physique                              20
Women’s bodybuilding                        22
Women’s physique                            24
Figure                                      26
Bikini                                       28



MEN’S DIVISIONS
Men can enter the bodybuilding, classic physique, and physique divisions. Each
differs from the other two based on the criteria for muscularity, conditioning and
muscular definition, and symmetry.


Men’s Bodybuilding
Muscularity The criteria for muscularity in men’s bodybuilding are simple: the
more muscle, the better. Muscle size is a primary factor for winning a
bodybuilding show.

Conditioning and Muscular Definition Conditioning in men’s bodybuilding
is the most extreme of all divisions: you want to get as lean as possible.
However, do not pursue fat loss to the point that you sacrifice muscularity.
Proper dietary, cardio, and training methods ensure maximum fat loss and
maximum muscle retention.
Symmetry The standard for muscular symmetry in men’s bodybuilding is to
have an even balance of development among all muscle groups. For structural
symmetry, it is ideal to have wide-set shoulders and a small waist.

Additional Considerations The competitors in men’s bodybuilding wear
posing trunks. In today’s competitive landscape, competitors wear trunks that
show some glute muscle. The days when you could leave something to the
imagination are gone, unfortunately.
Classic Physique
Muscularity Classic physique would best be described as requiring slightly
less muscularity than in bodybuilding. But both authors find that it is rare to find
any drug-free male who can achieve a look that would be considered too
muscular for this division, so most men should train for maximum muscularity.
For competitors who use PEDs, it is indeed possible to become too large if you
are not careful, so do not push things too far.
Conditioning and Muscular Definition In regard to conditioning, the classic
physique division calls for a look that is slightly less lean than in bodybuilding.
However, in practice, we often see the leanest competitors place higher. Do not
get so lean that you sacrifice fullness. Because the glutes do not show in classic
physique posing trunks, striated glutes are not necessary. This means if your
glutes are the last area to lean out, you may want to stop just short of seeing
visible glute striations in order to preserve fullness in the other muscle groups.

Symmetry The criteria for muscular symmetry in classic physique are to have
an even balance of development among all muscle groups. For structural
symmetry, it is ideal to have wide-set shoulders and a small waist.

Additional Considerations Competitors in classic physique must wear posing
trunks similar to bike shorts. As mentioned, they should cover your glutes and
the top of your upper quads. Although classic physique has a different look in
terms of muscle size for nondrug-tested shows, in drug-tested shows, classic
physique looks nearly identical to bodybuilding except that competitors wear
different posing trunks.




Men’s Physique
Muscularity Unlike in the bodybuilding division, it is possible to be too
muscular in men’s physique. How muscular is too muscular? This is the
challenge. Different judges and different shows commonly have varied ideals for
how muscular a physique athlete should be. Most competitors will have the best
results by continuing to strive for more muscle mass. While it is technically
possible to be too muscular, most drug-free competitors do not reach this level.
Our best advice is to continue to train for as much muscle as possible; if the
judges tell you that you are too muscular, then you can scale back your training a
bit. If you are a drug-using competitor, slowly build up, and do not push things
too far too quickly.

Conditioning and Muscular Definition Many sanctions claim that men’s
physique competitors should not be too shredded, but this does not always
reflect real-life competition. Our experience as coaches has shown us that leaner
is usually better, and many more successful physique competitors are almost
every bit as lean as bodybuilders. Our recommendation is to get as lean as
possible but stop just short of seeing striations in your glute muscle.
Symmetry In men’s physique, it is favorable to be most developed in the
heavily judged muscle groups: abdominals, pectorals, delts, back, biceps, triceps,
and calves. It is not necessary to fully develop the quads, hamstrings, or glutes.
Although muscularity of these areas is a good thing, there is no need to aim for
maximum development since they are not judged. The ideal men’s physique
competitor will also have a small waist and wide-set shoulders.

Additional Considerations Men’s physique competitors wear board shorts
similar to a swimsuit. It covers your quads, hamstrings, and glutes, so those
areas are not judged.




  Competitors who are not very muscular may think they must belong in men’s
physique rather than in bodybuilding. However, this is not always the case. In
men’s physique, you have fewer ways to beat your opponent because there are
only four poses. In bodybuilding, there are 13 poses, meaning there are more
ways to pose to your advantage. Also, leg conditioning and muscularity are not
considered in physique, so there are even fewer ways to gain an advantage if
your genetics give you a body type with features judged unfavorably in this
division. If you are smaller but have well-developed legs, it may be in your best
interest to try bodybuilding so that you use your strengths to your advantage on
stage.


WOMEN’S DIVISIONS
Women have four divisions: bodybuilding, physique, figure, and bikini. Each
division has a certain look based on muscularity, conditioning and muscular
definition, and symmetry.


Women’s Bodybuilding
Muscularity The goal is simply to be as muscular as possible. Just as in men’s
bodybuilding, the more muscle, the better.

Conditioning and Muscular Definition Conditioning in women’s
bodybuilding is the most extreme of all divisions, and the objective is to get as
lean as possible. However, you should not pursue fat loss to the point where you
sacrifice muscularity.
Symmetry The criteria for muscular symmetry in women’s bodybuilding are
an even balance of development among all muscle groups. For structural
symmetry, it is ideal to have wide-set shoulders, a small waist, and narrower
hips.

Additional Considerations The criteria for women’s bodybuilding and men’s
bodybuilding are almost identical. The goal is to get as muscular and lean as
your genetics allow. Women in the bodybuilding division are not supposed to be
judged on femininity, makeup, or hair, but we have seen these things become a
factor at times. Give some consideration to makeup and hair; many judges will
lump this in with overall stage presentation, even though they are not supposed
to.
    For this division, women do not wear heels. Typically, women’s
bodybuilding suits are one color and do not have rhinestones or sequins
(although you should check the rules of the sanction you are competing in).




Women’s Physique
Muscularity Ideal muscularity for the women’s divisions can be hard to
determine. If women’s bodybuilding aims for maximum muscularity, then
women’s physique would best be described as slightly less than that maximum.
Even though the criteria for women’s physique call for less muscularity than in
the bodybuilding division, both authors find it rare for a drug-free female to
achieve a look considered too muscular for this division. Most women have best
results training for maximum muscularity.
Conditioning and Muscular Definition Although the criteria for women’s
physique call for being slightly less lean than in the women’s bodybuilding
division, in real life, most competitors who place highly in women’s physique
achieve maximum conditioning. The goal should be to get as lean as you can.




Symmetry The criteria for muscular symmetry in women’s physique are pretty
much identical to those in the bodybuilding division. The goal is to have an even
balance of development among all muscle groups. For structural symmetry, it is
ideal to have wide-set shoulders, a small waist, and narrower hips.

Additional Considerations Some sanctions require a rhinestoned suit and
heels for this division, but some sanctions do not. Be sure to check with your
sanction or promoter before the show so you know what they require. Typically,
hair and makeup are considered part of the presentation portion for this division.
This does not mean judges expect you to look like you are in a beauty contest,
but choosing makeup and hair that is suited for you is important.
   For the women’s physique division, there is not a lot of difference between
women’s bodybuilding and women’s physique. However, the posing is more
feminine, and an overall physique deemed a bit more feminine will be judged
more favorably here than in bodybuilding. This must be considered when
deciding between the two divisions.




Figure
Muscularity The muscularity requirement for the figure division is slightly
below that of women’s physique. In the drug-tested sanctions, there is not a lot
of muscularity difference from the ideal women’s physique competitor, but there
is a slight difference. However, in untested competitions there is indeed a
difference. If women’s bodybuilding muscularity is described as maximum, then
the ideal figure muscularity would be described as moderately high.
   There are also differences between the amateur and pro levels, specifically in
drug-tested competitions. In the amateur levels, judges look for a slightly lower
level of muscularity, but on the drug-tested pro level, some women will have
muscularity near a bodybuilding level.

Conditioning and Muscular Definition In figure, the ideal conditioning can
be a bit subjective. Aim for a look slightly softer than in the bodybuilding and
physique divisions. The ideal look for figure shows separation between the
muscle groups but does not have extremely striated muscularity. There should
not be visible glute striations in the figure division.
Symmetry Structural symmetry in figure is even more important than in
women’s physique and bodybuilding because in those two divisions, there are
many other ways to beat your opponent (such as getting leaner and having more
poses to display muscularity). However, since there are only four poses in figure,
having naturally wide shoulders and hips and a naturally narrow waist can be a
powerful advantage. The typical feminine hourglass figure is desired in this
division.
   Muscular symmetry is similar to the other divisions in that you should strive
for balance between all muscle groups, although figure favors greater
muscularity in the shoulders.

Additional Considerations In all sanctions, the figure division requires a
rhinestoned suit and heels. Having professionally done makeup and hair is
important because presentation is a bigger portion of the judging. This division
is generally considered even more feminine than bodybuilding or physique—not
that the authors (or most judges) are qualified to determine what is feminine and
what is not. But most criteria state that competitors should display a muscular
yet feminine physique.




Bikini
Muscularity Just as figure had a lower muscularity requirement than the
previous two female divisions, bikini has an even lower requirement for muscle
size. If figure muscularity is described as moderately high, then bikini
muscularity would be described as moderate. Competitors in the bikini division
should be fit but not necessarily muscular.

Conditioning and Muscular Definition The bikini division also has the softest
look of all the women’s divisions. The precise amount of muscular definition
that a bikini competitor should have is hotly debated. In fact, different sanctions
often differ in their judging based on what they consider the ideal conditioning.
This standard may even differ between shows within the same sanction
depending on the judging panel. Generally, a bikini competitor should have
visible abdominal muscles but not deep separation. It is ideal to have slight
muscle separation in the shoulders and back but not striations.
    A crucial factor in bikini conditioning is partially genetic. People hold fat in
different places, meaning some people have an advantage in achieving ideal
bikini conditioning. Typically, those with a naturally lean midsection will be
favored because they can get a tight midsection without looking too hard or
striated in other areas.
Symmetry In bikini, just as in figure, structural symmetry is important.
Whereas figure has four poses, in most sanctions bikini only has two poses: the
front and back. Having a well-balanced structural look is crucial because you
will not have many opportunities to overcome any structural deficiencies.
   The glute and deltoid muscles are the two primary components of muscular
symmetry for bikini. When structuring your training for a bikini competition,
make these two areas a priority because judges look there. Balance training for
the rest of the muscle groups accordingly.
   For bikini, body fat symmetry plays a role in success. As mentioned earlier,
natural body fat distribution varies. Some people store fat more evenly across the
body, while others store fat in pockets. This normally does not matter in the
other divisions because competitors need to get so lean that it will balance out
with time. However, bikini requires a softer look, and the competitors carry
more body fat than other divisions. Those with a more even body fat distribution
fare better than those who tend to store fat in pockets.

Additional Considerations Bikini competitors should have a rhinestoned or
decorated suit, and the bikini division requires heels on stage. Just as in figure,
makeup and hair are part of the presentation criteria, and competitors are
expected to have a feminine appearance.
   More so than any other division, bikini competitors are judged on
presentation factors and less on physique. This means your smile, your walk, and
general air of confidence can all be judged. This should also be considered when
choosing which division to compete in.
 FAQ: Can a competitor compete in more than one
 division at a show?
 Some shows allow competitors to compete in multiple divisions at the same
 show. However, the ideal look desired in each division differs. This means
 that what helps a competitor place highly in one division may hurt placing in
 another. Typically, it is difficult to place highly within multiple divisions at
 the same show; however, we have seen it happen.


FINAL WORD ON DIVISION
CRITERIA
You may notice that the criteria descriptions seem rather vague and that there is
no completely clear definition for each division. This is both the trouble with and
the beauty of a subjective sport. There cannot be any absolute ideal for any
division because different people have different preferences, bodies, and looks.
   When choosing a division it is important to realize that, due to genetics, what
looks best on one person may not look good on you. Understand that the precise
look for each division is fluid. The look that the judges determine to be ideal can
change from show to show based on the overall look of the lineup, and it can
also change from year to year as trends change. Do not let the options
overwhelm you; instead, train for the division of your choice and continue
improving over time to meet the criteria.

 FAQ: I feel like I may be able to compete in more than
 one division. How do I choose the best division for me?
 Sometimes a competitor may fit in multiple divisions. In these situations, we
 recommend reviewing the previous physiques that have been successful at
 your target competitions to determine where your physique may fit best. In
 addition, if you are on the fence about which division to enter, consider the
 type of look you would like to present onstage when selecting a division.
CLASSES
Once you have an idea of which division you will compete in, the next decision
is the class to compete in. Within each division, several different classes are
typically offered. This is often a point of confusion for new competitors.
Understand the differences between classes so that you enter the best classes for
you at this point.


Classes Based on Age
There may be several classes at a given contest that are based on age. Although
each show differs in which classes they offer, the following is a general
guideline to classes based on age. Check with the show where you are competing
for specific age guidelines.

Teen
The teen class is open to competitors 19 years old and younger. Some
competitions may also offer multiple teen classes (under 17 years old, under 19
years old, and so on); however, most competitions offer only one teen class: for
those 19 years old and younger.

Junior
Some competitions offer a junior class with a maximum age typically around 22
to 24 years. However, this class is not offered at many competitions.

Submasters
This class is open to individuals aged 35 to 39 years. It is offered at many
competitions but not all.

Masters
Nearly all competitions have a masters division. This class is open to those aged
40 and over; however, in some divisions, the masters class may begin at age 35.
Some competitions also offer a grand masters class of age 50 and over and an
ultra-grand masters class for those older than 60.


Classes Based on Experience
Many competitions also offer classes based on experience or performance in
previous competitions.

Debut and Beginner
Some competitions offer a debut class for individuals who have not previously
stepped onstage. However, this is not offered at many competitions.

Novice
A novice class is for those who have not yet won a class or placed above a
certain point in a larger class (usually the top three). Most individuals in this
class are new to competing.

Open
This is the most competitive amateur class because it is open to all amateurs.
Winners of each open class will compete for the overall title. If a competition is
a pro qualifier, the open overall winner receives a pro card.

 FAQ: Why are there multiple classes within the same
 show? For example, why are there three open men’s
 bodybuilding classes?
 When many competitors sign up for the same class within a division, the
 promoter may decide to split competitors into multiple classes. This helps to
 ensure that everyone has time to get a fair comparison to the other competitors
 onstage.
    Bikini, figure, and men’s physique classes are commonly split by height.
 However, bodybuilding classes may be split by height or weight, depending
 on the sanction. Sanctions such as the NPC, NGA, and INBF typically split
 bodybuilding classes by weight, while sanctions such as the NANBF and
 OCB typically split by height.
    When there are multiple classes, the winners of each class are often
 compared in an overall. For example, if there are lightweight, middleweight,
 and heavyweight classes of open bodybuilding, the winners of each class will
 be compared against each other to determine the overall winner. If the
 competition is a pro qualifier, the overall winner receives a pro card.
Professional
This class is only offered to competitors who have won a pro card. You earn a
pro card by winning an open overall title at a larger amateur competition (NPC
national-level competition or designated drug-tested pro qualifier). Competitors
in the pro class compete for prize money, but amateur classes do not award prize
money.

 FAQ: Can competitors make a living from prize money
 earned in professional competitions?
 While competitors can win prize money in a professional bodybuilding
 competition, it is typically not enough to quit a day job, aside from a few top
 bodybuilders in the IFBB. Typical payouts for winning a professional drug-
 tested bodybuilding competition range from $500 to $1,000 for smaller
 competitions and up to $5,000 for larger competitions such as a world
 championship. Although IFBB competitions typically award larger monetary
 prizes than drug-tested professional competitions, it is still not enough for
 most competitors to make a living by competing. However, many professional
 bodybuilders are highly successful in their real-world jobs as well due to their
 work ethic.


Other Classes Offered
Some competitions have classes based on other factors or conditions not related
to experience. To be sure you properly qualify for one of these classes, check
with the show where you are competing for specific guidelines.

Classes Based on Profession
On occasion, classes may be offered based on the profession of the competitors.
Common examples are a police and fire class or a military class.

Collegiate
Many competitions also offer a collegiate class for current college students.
However, this class often has an age cap, so those considering the collegiate
class should consult the show guidelines.

Transformation
Some competitions offer a transformation class for individuals who have made a
large visual transformation to get onstage. These classes typically involve
submitting a picture from a time before the competitor’s fitness journey and
comparing it to his or her current physique.

Classes for Individuals With Special Needs
Classes are often offered for individuals with special needs. This may include
physical disabilities such as paralysis, cognitive impairments such as Down
syndrome, and others.


 FAQ: Can a competitor compete in more than one class
 at a show?
 Most competitions allow you to compete in more than one class, provided you
 are qualified to enter each class. Typically, there is a crossover fee for
 entering more than one class. Consult the competitor information or contact
 the promoter for the specific show for details on crossing over between
 classes.


Criteria Defined
    Muscularity refers to how much muscle mass a competitor carries. The
    more muscle you build, the more muscular you are and the higher your
    level of muscularity. Some divisions call for high levels of muscularity, and
    others call for lower levels.

    Conditioning and muscular definition are essentially synonyms and refer
    to the absence of body fat. The leaner you are, the more conditioned you are
    and the more muscle definition you will be able to see. Being lean (having
    less body fat) ensures that your muscularity can properly show through.
    Divisions vary in their ideals for conditioning.
  Muscular symmetry refers to even development of all muscle groups.
  Some divisions call for a bit more development in certain areas, but in
  general the goal is evenness. Structural symmetry refers to how your body
  is put together: how wide your clavicles are set, how narrow your waist is,
  how long your arms are, and so on. Although muscular symmetry can be
  changed through training, structural symmetry cannot because it is dictated
  by genetics. However, certain structures may mean you are more suited to
  do well in one division over another.

Take-Home Points
 ▶ More divisions are offered at competitions than ever before, and the ideal
  look is different in each division. Understand the different standards for
  each division so you can choose the division that best suits your physique.
 ▶ Standards within a division may differ slightly from sanction to sanction
  or even between competitions within the same sanction. If possible,
  review the physiques that have been successful at your target competitions
  and pick a division based on where your physique will likely fit best.
 ▶ Classes at a competition are primarily based on a competitor’s experience
  and age. Understand which classes you are qualified for so that you can
  enter the classes most appropriate for your physique at this point in your
  competitive career.
                                                                               4
The Reality of Readiness



Prepping for a bodybuilding contest is hard! People look at their favorite
competitors and think, “I want to look like that.” The problem is that too few
people stop to ask themselves what is required to make it to the stage
successfully.
   There is a difference between getting on a bodybuilding stage for fun and
getting on a bodybuilding stage at your very best. In their zeal to compete, far
too many people do not take the time to get themselves in a good spot, both
mentally and physically, before contest prep. Let’s look at what it takes to be
ready to compete.


NEW COMPETITORS
The two most helpful things that someone new to the sport can do to foster
success is to give the needed time to gain muscle and to attend shows to learn all
the ins and outs of the sport.


Build a Foundation
It is not uncommon for people to discover weight training and immediately
decide that they would like to compete. With no more than a few months of
training, they announce to the world they are prepping for their first
bodybuilding show. Then on show day, they are disheartened because they place
poorly and wonder what happened.
    This is because in a sport largely based around muscularity, they have given
themselves almost no time to build the muscle required to compete. To build the
needed muscularity, you must dedicate a significant amount of time to training
hard and eating in a caloric surplus. Three years of training while eating plenty
of calories is far different from three years of training primarily in a caloric
deficit trying to lose fat. The former will result in far more muscle mass than the
latter. Give yourself plenty of time to train, eat, and build new muscle.
    Your genetics and the category in which you intend to compete dictate the
time needed to build muscle. For example, those competing in the bikini division
need less time than those competing in the bodybuilding division, just as those
with naturally muscular physiques need less training time than those with
naturally thin structures. It may not seem fair, but it is just the way it works.
While there is no definitive rule, we have provided a general guide for how long
you should train before you make your way to the competitive stage in table 4.1.

Table 4.1 Recommended Years of Serious Training Before Competing by
Division
DIVISION                                                   YEARS
Bikini                                                     1-3
Figure                                                     2-4
Men’s physique                                             2-4
Women’s physique                                           3-5
Classic physique                                           3-5
Women’s bodybuilding                                       3-5
Men’s bodybuilding                                         3-5


    There are a couple of factors to keep in mind about these time frames. The
first is that genetics largely dictate how long you need to train before you step on
stage. As noted previously, some people have the genetic ability to build muscle
more quickly and need less training time. Other people may have poor genetics
for building muscle and require more time. Second, the time described in table
4.1 is needed before beginning contest prep and should be largely spent in a
caloric surplus rather than dieting and trying to lose fat. Another factor to
consider about these time frames is that this is typically the amount of time
needed in order to be ready to compete adequately. If you are competing to win,
you will probably require even more training time before stepping on stage.


Attend a Competition
Although attending a show before you prep is not an absolute necessity, it is
probably a good idea because it gives you a clearer picture of what you are
working toward, a sense of the contest rules, and an understanding of how a
show is run. Consider this like doing your homework before a test. While you
can still do well on the test if you have not done the homework, your chances of
doing well are increased if you completed the assignment. Go to a show and see
what it is like, and you will pick up some added motivation along the way.
   To have a complete view of what happens on contest day, attend both the
prejudging and the night show of a competition. However, if you are only able to
attend for part of the day, we encourage new competitors to attend prejudging
(the preliminary round of judging), where most judging occurs at a competition.

 FAQ: As a new competitor attending a competition for
 the first time, is it important for me to attend a
 competition in the sanction in which I plan to compete?
 Sanctions may run shows differently. Therefore, it would be a good idea to
 attend a show within the same sanction you plan to compete. This is especially
 important when looking at drug-tested versus untested competitions because
 the physiques onstage may be drastically different depending on your
 division. To get a more accurate representation of the physiques onstage at
 your competition, attend a drug-tested show if you plan to compete in a drug-
 tested competition or an untested show if you plan to compete in an untested
 competition.


EXPERIENCED COMPETITORS
For those who have gone through the contest prep process and competed, contest
readiness is based on giving yourself enough time to recover from the last show
and improve for the next show at a rate in line with your genetics, age, and
experience.


How Long Since Your Last Show
Rushing into prep is a mistake that also plagues seasoned competitors. Often,
after people finish a show, they experience one of two reactions: If they placed
well and experienced a high from the sense of accomplishment, they cannot wait
to get back on stage to get that feeling again. Or, if they placed poorly, they want
to get back on stage as soon as possible to redeem themselves.
   Both reactions lead to getting back on stage far too soon. Take time between
shows because muscular growth takes time. This is especially true for drug-free
competitors. If your goal is to get better from one show to the next (and that
should be the goal for everyone), then you need to spend significant time eating
in a caloric surplus and building muscle.
   After a show, you must first recover from your contest prep before you can
begin to make new progress. Research has shown that full recovery of
testosterone, cortisol, metabolic rate, thyroid hormone, and muscle mass can take
anywhere from two to six months (2, 3). It is unrealistic to think that a two-
month off-season, for example, is enough to make significant progress between
contest seasons.


Typical Progression Rate
The rate at which people can make visual improvements in their physiques
varies significantly. Genetics, age, and training experience play a significant role
in the rate of progression. Here are a few things to consider when deciding how
much time you should take between shows.

Genetics
As noted previously, some people build muscle more quickly than others; this
has been documented in scientific literature (1). Those who can build muscle
quickly can usually take less time between shows and still make significant
progress. If you take a long time to add muscle mass, take more time between
shows to allow yourself time to improve.

Age
Natural levels of anabolic hormones and recovery rates are at their peaks during
teens and early twenties. These are the prime growth years, and around age 25,
there is a steady decline in growth potential. This means that younger people
may need less time between shows to make significant progress. However, just
because a younger person can make progress with less time between shows does
not mean that he or she should compete more often. Both authors agree that if a
competitor is truly dedicated to maximizing long-term potential, younger
competitors should not waste their prime growth years spending a lot of time
dieting for shows.

Training Experience
We have all seen people who are always dieting for a show yet, from year to
year, seem to get bigger and more muscular. How is this possible? Does not this
fly in the face of everything we discussed so far? In a situation like this, if you
do a little digging, you often find that this person has been training less than five
years. Most people see the most dramatic progression in the first five years of
training. During this time, it is not uncommon to see people lose fat and build
muscle at the same time even on very low calories. When they do eat enough
calories, they can add size quickly. When someone competes often and still
progresses, this is usually a short-lived effect. It may continue for a few years,
but as training experience increases, the person sees progress slow down and
may eventually regress without adequate time between shows. The longer you
have been training, the longer you need between shows to make improvements.
    There is no hard rule for how long you should take between shows, but a
good range would be to take at least 16 to 36 months between shows to see
significant visual improvement onstage for natural competitors. Those
competitors using PEDs will require less time between shows since progress and
recovery are accelerated by drug use. For most competitors using PEDs, 8 to 24
months between shows should allow enough time for visual progress to be made.
Most of this time should be spent in an energy surplus.


 FAQ: Would you ever recommend competing with less
 time between shows?
 The 16- to 36-month range previously listed is how long we would
 recommend between contest seasons to see visual change. However, it is
 common to compete in multiple shows within the same contest season. We
 recommend choosing multiple shows within a one- or two-month period
 rather than dragging out the amount of time spent stage-lean. More
 information about how to handle competing in multiple shows can be found in
 chapter 12.


READINESS FOR CONTEST PREP
Regardless of whether you are new to the sport or have competed many times,
everyone needs to have an effective mindset and enhance the ability to have an
optimal metabolic capacity, manage any existing injuries, follow a plan, and
withstand the financial and psychological impact of contest prep.


Acquiring an Effective Mindset
Developing an effective mindset comes naturally to some and through great
hardship to others. When getting ready to start a contest prep, it is not
uncommon to hear people say things like, “I’ll accept nothing less than victory”
or “Failure is not an option.” When people say these things, they think they are
showing others, and themselves, just how much they want this. However, as
experienced coaches, we say that this type of talk is usually born out of
desperation rather than determination, and to the untrained person, the two
mindsets can seem eerily similar.
    It is common for people to focus on the goal when it comes to bodybuilding.
They focus on the show they want to win, they focus on wanting to add 20
pounds (9 kg) of muscle, or they focus on turning pro. While having goals is
fine, the most effective mindset is one that places goals as the secondary focus
and places the process as the primary focus. Focusing on your goal does
absolutely nothing to help you achieve your goal. It is merely a distraction from
what actually helps you achieve your goal, which is carrying out the process as
effectively as possible and with as much effort as possible.
    Let us put it another way. Assume that you are running a marathon. Your goal
is to cross that finish line and prove to yourself that you can do it. It would make
no sense to pull out binoculars every few feet to look at the finish line. It will not
help you get there any faster, and you are likely going to slow yourself down.
Instead of looking at the finish line, focus on the steps directly in front of you.
Bodybuilding is no different. Your goal is clear: to win or place as high as you
can. However, focusing on your goal isn’t going to help you achieve your goal.
Focusing on your process will do everything to help you achieve your goal.
   Another aspect to consider is that you must develop the ability to move
forward regardless of outcome. Often those who are goal-focused rather than
process-focused struggle after the goal completion. They are much like a donkey
chasing a carrot on a string. Once the carrot is removed or eaten, they are
aimless. You cannot become so focused on winning your show that losing will
make you fall into a depression. And you cannot become so focused on winning
that if you do win, you feel as though you have nothing left to prove. The most
effective competitors always know that each success and each failure is only
temporary until the next success or failure. In the end, the most effective mind-
set is one that focuses on the process, examines the results rather than dwelling
on them, and moves forward with an improved process.
   Finally, you must enjoy what you are doing. A process fueled by enjoyment
will be easier to carry out than one fueled by a desperate need for approval. Find
the things that you love about training, dieting, and posing. If you do that, the
rest comes easily.


Optimizing Metabolic Capacity
It does not matter if you are a first-time competitor or have been competing for
20 years. Before beginning any contest prep, you must make sure your metabolic
rate is at a peak. Optimizing metabolic capacity is simple. You need to spend
time getting food intake as high as possible and cardio as low as possible while
still maintaining a reasonable body fat percentage.
    Try to think of metabolic capacity like a gas tank. Everything that you can do
to create fat loss should be placed into this metaphorical metabolic tank. This
means any amount of cardio that you can add and any calories that you can cut
can be placed into the tank. If someone is eating plenty of food and doing little
to no cardio, the tank is full because he or she has plenty of ways to create fat
loss by adjusting calories and exercise. However, if someone is only eating
1,000 calories per day and already doing 45 minutes of cardio daily, it means his
or her tank is empty because nothing can be added to the tank by doing more
cardio or cutting more calories without detriment.
   Beginning contest prep with an empty metabolic tank is like taking a car ride
with an empty gas tank. Eventually, things stall more quickly than they normally
would. Obviously, you can always create more fat loss by cutting more calories
and adding more cardio. However, you eventually reach a point where going to
such extremes will be a detriment. Fat loss will not be ideal, muscle mass will be
lost, and recovery will be at an all-time low. Your body could rebel against you
if you do not break mentally first. This commonly leads to a worse look on
stage.
   Make sure you take enough time to increase food and decrease cardio while
sustaining a reasonable distance from stage-lean before starting contest prep. Fill
up that metabolic tank before embarking on the journey of contest prep.


Managing Injuries
If you are a serious athlete, the odds are that you are dealing with at least one
minor injury at any given time. Injuries happen when lifting heavy objects day in
and day out for years on end. However, there is a significant difference between
the little nagging injuries, muscle strains, or minor “tweaks” that happen from
time to time and the more serious injuries that set training back significantly.
   During contest prep, you will lose some muscle mass, and recovery will be
reduced. If your training capacity is already hindered at the start of contest prep,
this is not a good spot to begin. Recovery from the injury will be slow, and if
muscle mass has been lost due to the injury, it may not come back during prep.
   Make sure you let any significant injury heal before entering prep. Training
capacity and muscle mass should both be at an all-time high before starting.


Sticking to a Plan
A successful contest prep should be so consistent that it is almost boring. Day in
and day out, you must be able to stick to your nutrition plan, perform your
training and cardio, get plenty of sleep, and then wake up the next day and do it
all over again. If you are not mentally able to do this or are not able to do it due
to life’s circumstances, you should not start prepping for a show.
    We often encounter people trying to start a contest prep even though they
have a wedding in five weeks, must leave the country for work in seven weeks,
have an anniversary trip planned in 10 weeks, and have several other events
planned in between. This does not mean it is impossible to continue a prep
through all these events and trips, but it is usually not a recipe for success. It is
possible to go through all these types of circumstances and hit your plan 100
percent, but you need to honestly ask yourself whether you are mentally ready to
do so. There is never a perfect time to compete, but some times are better than
others.


Bearing the Financial Impact
An often-overlooked aspect of competing is that it is not cheap! In addition to
regular food and gym membership costs, there are expenses for contest prep, a
contest entry fee, a sanction fee, a drug-testing fee (if at a drug-tested
competition), tanning products, at least one posing suit, and heels and jewelry (if
in a division that uses them).
   If a competitor has makeup and hair professionally done for show day or uses
a spray tan service, those are added expenses. In addition, if the contest is out of
town, travel and hotel costs can be significant. Further, many competitors today
work with a contest prep coach. While doing so can be extremely beneficial, it is
also an added expense. Lastly, if you compete in an additional class, there will
be an extra fee.

Table 4.2 Approximate Expenses for Contest Preparation and Show Day
Essential costs
Contest entry fee                   $100
Sanction fee                        $100
Drug-testing fee (for a drug-       $50
tested contest)
Self-tan tanning products and       $50
oil
Posing suit                         $50 (male), $300+ (female)
Heels (if in the bikini or figure   $50
division)
Jewelry (if in the bikini or        $50
figure division)
Optional costs
Professional makeup           $50-$100
Professional hair             $50+ (hair styling), $100+ (extensions)
Spray tan service             $100-$150
Travel                        $20+ (gas if driving), $300-$500+ (if flying), $30+/day
                              (car rental, if needed)
Hotel                         $100+/night
Contest prep coach            $150+/month
Additional class fee          $20-$40 per extra class


   An approximate summary of the expenses associated with contest prep and
show day are listed in table 4.2. A competitor needs to be aware of and prepared
for the expenses associated with competing before jumping into contest prep.
The last thing you want is to get partway through your contest prep only to find
out that you cannot actually compete due to financial reasons.


Handling the Psychological Impact
The final factor to consider before embarking on your journey to the stage is the
psychological impact of the sport. Make no mistake about it: bodybuilding prep
comes with a psychological toll. Many people do not talk about that once you
have gone through contest prep, you may never look at your body, or food, in the
same way again.
   After a contest prep, you may no longer be able to have a meal without
considering the impact that it will have on your physique. Even if you are not
actively prepping for a show, and even if you have long since stopped competing
in the sport, it may always be in the back of your mind. You become more
keenly aware of the flaws in your physique. Although most people are critical of
their own bodies, you will always hold yourself to a higher standard because you
have seen yourself in stage condition. As a result, you will often find yourself
judging your own body against your previous best.
   Some people can balance all this, feel comfortable with it, and use it to make
them better and happier. For others, it can absolutely break them. Do not enter
this sport lightly. You need to ask yourself whether these trade-offs are worth it
to you.
   Finally, many people train and compete in bodybuilding because they want to
improve their bodies. However, if you enter this sport because you hate your
body or have negative relationships with food, this sport will not fix the
problem. In fact, it will likely only exacerbate the issue. Contest prep is extreme
and restrictive in nature. We push our minds and bodies to the limit, but after the
show, we must work to regain some level of normalcy (at least a bodybuilder’s
sense of normalcy). The transition is difficult even for a person who has a
completely healthy body image and relationship with food.
   Before beginning contest prep, resolve issues you may have with food or your
body image and make sure you are in a healthy spot mentally. Even still, it is a
good idea to consider the long-term impact that competing will have on your life
and your sense of balance.


PATIENCE AND TIME PAY OFF
Consider this chapter as your checklist to determine if you are truly ready to
compete. Anybody can rush to the stage and receive a participation trophy.
However, it takes something more to show patience and aim to truly bring your
best. Not everyone has the willpower to be patient and wait until ready. Set
yourself apart from the pack and be the one willing to put in the necessary time.

Take-Home Points
   ▶ A first-time competitor should build enough muscle base and attend a
    competition before competing.
   ▶ Experienced competitors should ensure they have a sufficient off-season
    before beginning the next contest prep. Generally, an off-season of at least
    16 to 36 months is necessary to see significant visual progress. The exact
    amount of time needed for each competitor differs based on genetics, age,
    and training experience.
   ▶ To be successful regardless of competition experience, you need to have
    an effective mindset and an optimal metabolic capacity, manage any
    existing injuries, follow a plan, and withstand the financial and
    psychological impact of contest prep.
                                                                               5
Show Selection and Timing: The
Secrets of Preparation



There is nothing like the feeling of looking at the show schedule for the year and
choosing the show or shows you will compete in. Then things start to feel like
they have a purpose, and the reality of show day begins to loom. In the previous
chapter, we covered everything that needs to be in place before you are truly
ready to start contest prep. If you have met all the requirements, it is time to
begin your journey to the stage! Where do you start?
   On the surface, selecting a show may seem easy. Many simply pick a show
located near where they live. But a show can make or break the success of your
season, and you need to find the right one.


SELECTING THE RIGHT SHOW
In our coaching careers, we have seen nearly 90 percent of prospective clients
select a show that will set them up for failure. That astronomically high number
is because people do not realize the importance of this decision. Even if you
make all the correct nutrition adjustments and are losing weight week after
week, if you have not given yourself ample time to prep for your show, then you
are doomed to fail before you even begin.
   Historically, a competitor determines the length of prep by using a completely
arbitrary process. For many years, 12 weeks was considered the standard length
of a contest prep. When you decided to compete, it did not matter how much
weight you needed to lose. You began prep at 12 weeks out, no matter what. As
the bodybuilding community has started to realize the benefits of a slower prep,
the standard prep length has become 15 to 20 weeks. Even this period may not
be enough for many competitors.
    There should not be a one-size-fits-all approach to prep length. We would not
give everyone the same diet, so why would we give everyone the same length of
prep? A proper prep length should be determined by your individual situation,
not a “standard” number of weeks. There is a big difference between trying to
lose 20 pounds (9 kg) in 20 weeks and losing 40 pounds (18 kg) in the same
period. These situations require a different prep time length.
    Let us look at it a different way and apply a similar situation to a squat goal.
If two people have a goal of squatting 400 pounds (181 kg), and one of them can
currently squat 390 pounds (177 kg) and the other can currently squat 185
pounds (84 kg), would you give them both five weeks to hit their goals?
Absolutely not! This is like determining the length of contest prep; always
remember that context is king.

 FAQ: What is the best time for me to start contest prep?
 There is no best time to start dieting for a competition. Many individuals who
 wait for the best time end up never competing because something always
 comes up in life. Similarly, many competitors (primarily male) are waiting to
 compete until they feel they are “big enough.” However, these individuals
 often end up never stepping onstage.
    Ultimately, some times in life are easier or harder than others to diet down
 for a show. There will likely always be something going on in your life that
 you must work around during contest prep. Life does not stop just because
 you are dieting for a competition. You should not be using contest prep as an
 excuse to not live your life.


APPROPRIATE RATE OF LOSS
The first thing you need to know about an ideal contest prep is that you should
keep a steady but slow rate of fat loss. Research indicates you want to be in the
range of losing 0.5 to 1 percent of body weight each week (8). This rate of loss
(ROL)—the weight loss that you must maintain to be ready by show day—is fast
enough to keep contest prep moving but slow enough to better retain muscle
along the way.
    Case study data from drug-free male competitors showed weekly losses of 0.5
percent of body weight (15) resulted in greater muscle retention than weekly
losses of 0.7 percent (9) or 1.0 percent (12). This means it may be advisable to
stick closer to a weekly loss of 0.5 percent of body weight, especially during the
late phases of prep when an athlete is extremely lean and most susceptible to
muscle loss.
    If you are male, this means you want to target an average weekly loss of
about 0.75 to 1.5 pounds (0.3-0.7 kg). Female competitors should shoot for a
weekly loss of 0.5 to 1.25 pounds (0.2-0.6 kg) or less.
    Although this is a slower ROL compared to the traditional 12-week prep
approach, this is ideal for several reasons. Most notably, slower fat loss can do
the following:
   ▶ Lead to more retained muscle mass (5, 6)
   ▶ Result in fewer negative repercussions on training performance and
    recovery (3, 13)
   ▶ Reduce or slow metabolic suppression (10)
   ▶ Create a more sustainable mental state
    The faster the ROL, the higher the percentage of weight lost from muscle
tissue and the more negative effects you will see in your training. Although this
small effect may not be much of a concern when trying to drop a few pounds or
kilograms, muscle loss becomes a greater concern the longer you diet and the
leaner you become. When body fat stores are low, the body increasingly looks to
conserve fat reserves by breaking down muscle tissue when it needs energy. The
slower you take it, the less this will happen.


 FAQ: Does my weight need to decrease to get stage-
 lean?
 For a competitor to achieve stage-lean levels of body fat without the scale
 going down, muscle mass needs to be added at the same rate that body fat is
 lost. Since most competitors have 15 to 30 pounds (7-14 kg) of body fat (or
 more) to lose in the four to six or more months leading up to the competition,
 this means a similar amount of muscle mass simultaneously needs to be added
 during that time to keep the scale numbers from trending down.
    Beginners on steroids have been shown to gain as much as 13 pounds (6
 kg) of muscle mass in the first 10 weeks of weightlifting. However, drug-free
 males new to lifting only gained four or five pounds (1.8-2.3 kg) of lean mass
 in the same study (2). If a person is an experienced lifter (which he or she
 should be if dieting down for a contest), female, extremely lean, in an energy
 deficit, or any combination of these circumstances, the rate of muscle gain is
 significantly slower.
    In addition, as a drug-free competitor becomes leaner, hormone changes
 detrimental to muscle growth occur (15). This results in lean mass loss, even
 in successful drug-free athletes (9, 15). Although this loss is not all muscle, at
 least some of it is due to a corresponding reduction in strength commonly
 observed during contest prep when a person is extremely lean.
    Taken together, this data suggests that for nearly every trained drug-free
 athlete, weight will decrease to become stage-lean because it will not be
 possible to add muscle mass fast enough to offset the reduction in body fat.
 This is likely the case for athletes using drugs as well, but it depends on the
 type of drugs the individual is using and his or her history of drug use.


BENEFITS OF LONGER PREP
TIME
With a slow target ROL, your contest prep time will be longer than the
traditional 12-week prep. However, there are several benefits to a longer contest
prep time.


Increased Muscle Retention
A longer contest prep allows a competitor to diet at a slower rate. As discussed
previously, slow rates of loss are associated with increased muscle retention.
This is because the means necessary to see a slower ROL are not as extreme as
those necessary for the rapid loss typical of the old-school approach to contest
prep.
   Therefore, you can eat more food and do less cardio while still reaching your
targeted loss because the rate is slower. That leads to better performance in the
gym, better recovery, and more strength (and muscle) retention during contest
prep. Muscle retention is key for prep in any division because you are judged on
the amount of muscle you display on show day, not how much muscle was on
your frame at the end of your off-season.


Leaner Physique
This one is self-explanatory. If you have more time to diet, you have more time
to get leaner. Conditioning plays a large role in judging for all divisions and is
one of the biggest reasons competitors place lower than they expect. By giving
yourself more time to diet, you will be able to retain more muscle mass yet also
have time to get lean enough for your division.


Refeeds and Diet Breaks
One big advantage of a longer contest prep time is that your prep does not have
to be a sprint to the finish. With extra time, you can have days where calories are
closer to or even slightly above maintenance.
   A single day where calories are higher is often called a refeed day in
bodybuilding circles. The extra calories on these days typically come from
carbohydrate because carbohydrate overfeeding has a stronger effect on
increasing hormones like thyroid and leptin than fat or protein overfeeding do (1,
14).
   We will discuss what to do on a refeed day in more detail in chapter 6, but for
now, understand that dieting slowly allows you to incorporate days where
calories (and carbohydrates) are increased closer to maintenance caloric intake.
The advantages are increased performance in a workout on the day of or the day
after your refeed day due to increased glycogen stores. The largest benefit to a
refeed day could be that it can give you a mental break from a calorie deficit,
which helps you stick to your diet.
   While refeeds are typically just one or two days with an increased intake, a
diet break can range from one week to several weeks. During a diet break,
calories are close to maintenance to essentially stop fat loss. We will also discuss
diet breaks in more detail in chapter 6. Longer diet breaks have a greater effect
on performance in the gym, hormone levels, and psychology than a single refeed
day. In addition, diet breaks can have a more significant effect on metabolic
adaptation during dieting than a single refeed day. In fact, preliminary studies on
diet breaks have found that individuals who incorporate diet breaks saw no
detrimental effect on weight loss (18) or even increased weight loss (4).
    Although these concepts will be clearer after our discussion of how to
implement both techniques in chapter 6, we hope you can appreciate that
incorporating refeeds and diet breaks during contest prep can be beneficial. With
a longer contest prep time, you can incorporate these higher-calorie days and
still reach your target body composition.


Ready Early
Advocates of the 12-week prep approach usually mention not wanting to peak
too early. While you should not be ready months in advance, being ready a few
weeks early can be a benefit because you can start increasing food and tapering
cardio as the show approaches. If this is done conservatively, it will not result in
body fat gain and can lead to increased muscle glycogen stores. For each gram
of glycogen stored, three to four grams of water is pulled into muscle (11).
Visually, this means a fuller appearance, so the muscle looks larger and pushes
out more against the skin. In addition, greater glycogen stores mean a better
performance in the gym and aid muscle retention.
   Being ready early can also allow you to do a mock peak week so you can
adjust what you’re doing to meet your goal. When using a more aggressive (and
risky) peaking protocol, it is never a bad idea to test it out ahead of time rather
than going in blind the final week, when it counts. We will discuss peaking
protocols in chapter 10.


Reduced Stress
Bodybuilding contest prep is both physiologically and psychologically stressful.
Dieting to extreme levels of body fat results in significant alterations to many
hormones, menstrual cycles, and overall mood (7, 15, 16).
   Despite those things, competing is something you should enjoy; it should
enhance your life, not stress you out. Typically, if you enjoy the process, you
will work harder and stay more consistent, and as a result, the process will go
more smoothly. A longer prep also allows you to roll with the punches a bit
more to keep stress levels in check.
DETERMINING NEEDED PREP
TIME
When it comes to determining the appropriate length of a contest prep, ROL is
everything! Here are the steps to work through to estimate the amount of time
needed for contest prep.

Step 1: Measure Your Current Weight
This one is easy. Just get on a scale.

Step 2: Know Your Predicted Show Weight
This one is tricky, and you must be brutally honest with yourself. If you have
competed before, then you should have an estimate to work with. If you are a
first-time competitor, this will be hard. We find that most first-time competitors
overestimate the ideal show weight by about 8 to 15 pounds (3-7 kg). You are
better off aiming low and not needing to go there versus aiming high and
scrambling to go lower later.

Step 3: Determine How Many Total Pounds to Lose
This is a simple equation to determine the number of pounds you must lose
during contest prep. You take your current weight (CW) and subtract your
predicted show weight (SW); the answer gives you your pounds to lose (PTL).
                               CW − SW = PTL

Step 4: Determine How Many PTL per Week
This is another simple equation that gives you your target ROL. You take the
PTL determined in step 3 and divide by the number of weeks until the show
(WTS). The answer is your needed ROL.
                              PTL ÷ WTS = ROL
The ideal ROL differs from person to person. The easier you lose fat, the higher
ROL you should be able to easily maintain. While there is no hard rule for the
ideal ROL, we recommend the following guidelines (higher ROLs are rare):
   ▶ 0.75 to 1.5 pounds (0.3-0.7 kg) per week for males
   ▶ 0.5 to 1.25 pounds (0.2-0.6 kg) per week for females
If your necessary ROL is higher than this, slow down and pick a later show. On
the other hand, if your needed ROL is lower than this, you could pick up the
pace.

 FAQ: Do I need to select a show before starting contest
 prep?
 You do not need to select a show at the start of contest prep. In fact, this can
 work to your benefit. By picking your show later in prep and basing the
 contest choice on your progress, you will ensure that you are stepping onstage
 truly ready.

   To make this easier, we provide an example of how to determine ROL.
Assume we have a male competitor who currently weighs 200 pounds (91 kg)
with a targeted SW of 170 pounds (77 kg). He wants to do a show 25 weeks
away. Now we enter this into our equations.
                     200 (CW) − 170 (SW) = 30 (PTL)
            30 (PTL) ÷ 25 (WTS) = 1.2 pounds (0.5 kg) per week
Our bodybuilder is within the acceptable ROL for this show. He needs to
maintain an ROL of 1.2 pounds (0.5 kg) per week to be ready in time for his
competition.
   Now let us run through that same scenario with our bodybuilder as he
considers a show 17 weeks away.
                     200 (CW) − 170 (SW) = 30 (PTL)
            30 (PTL) ÷ 17 (WTS) = 1.76 pounds (0.8 kg) per week
As you can see, for our bodybuilder, a show 17 weeks away would be above the
ideal ROL. While he could rush the process and indeed be at that weight by
show day, he will likely be at less than his best by doing so. He would be better
off picking a later show instead.
   ROL during contest prep will not be linear. Metabolic adaptation occurs for
several reasons during contest prep (17) and is described in more detail in later
chapters. This results in weight loss plateaus—weeks when there is no loss at
all.
    For example, if you start prep with 20 pounds (9 kg) to lose in 20 weeks, you
need to lose at an average rate of one pound (0.5 kg) per week. Based on our
previous discussion, this is within an acceptable ROL for a male or female
competitor.
    Now, say that your prep starts off smooth, and you hit your target ROL over
the first four weeks. You lose four pounds (2 kg), but then you hit your first
plateau and lose nothing in week 5. Now you only have 15 weeks to lose 16
pounds (7 kg), which increases your target ROL slightly.
    You make the necessary adjustments, and by 11 weeks out, you have 12
pounds (5 kg) to lose. However, something unexpected comes up the next week,
and you gain one pound (0.5 kg). Maybe you get sick, maybe you get injured, or
maybe you slip up and cheat on your diet. Regardless, these setbacks happen in
real life so it is foolish to ignore them. Now you have 10 weeks to lose 13
pounds (6 kg), meaning you need to lose an average of 1.3 pounds (0.6 kg) each
week until your show to be ready. For a female competitor, this ROL is just
above the top end of the target range and will likely result in sacrificing muscle
to be ready in time. In addition, by having such a tight timeline, a male or female
competitor would not have time to do things like have a diet break or test out a
peaking protocol ahead of time.
    Always give yourself more time than you think is necessary. This allows you
to take things as they come during prep and still get stage-lean without
sacrificing excess muscle. One easy way to do this (if possible) is to base the
show you do on when you are ready. Begin contest prep with several shows in
mind. As you get closer to these shows, pick specific shows based on when you
are ready. If prep goes extremely well and you are ready early, you can do shows
at the earlier end of this range, but if things take longer than expected (which is
often the case), you have other shows to fall back on. This ensures that you will
not have to change your target ROL and that you will be at your best when you
step onstage.
    As you can see, choosing a show is not as simple as pointing to the calendar
and picking a date. There are a lot of working parts that come together in finding
the right show. This important decision can either lead you toward center stage
or have you standing off to the side, wishing you had given yourself more time.
FAQ: Could I achieve stage-lean levels of body fat in less
time than you recommend?
You could achieve stage-lean levels of body fat in less time than we
recommend, and many competitors have stepped onstage with shorter preps.
However, you most likely would not be stepping onstage at your best. A
shorter prep would require a quicker target ROL. This would require less
food, more cardio, or both to create a larger calorie deficit. The result would
be lower-quality workouts and more muscle loss. Increased muscle loss
during contest prep would also mean that your stage weight would be lower at
the same body fat percentage than had you dieted at a slower rate.


Take-Home Points
  ▶ The ideal weekly ROL for muscle retention during contest prep is 0.5 to 1
   percent of body weight, with lower ends of this range being preferred. As
   a rough starting point, males should lose 0.75 to 1.5 pounds (0.3-0.7 kg) a
   week while females should lose 0.5 to 1.25 pounds (0.2-0.6 kg) a week.
   This means that the traditional 12-week preps are not long enough for
   most competitors to get stage-lean.
  ▶ There are several benefits to a longer contest prep, including increased
   muscle retention, more time to get leaner, time for diet breaks, refeeds,
   ability to test a peaking protocol, and a less stressful prep overall.
  ▶ When determining the length of your contest prep, include extra weeks to
   account for plateaus and to give yourself time for things like diet breaks
   and to practice your peaking protocol.
  ▶ If possible, pick your show or shows based on when you are ready rather
   than targeting a specific show from the start of contest prep. This reduces
   stress and ensures that you are truly at your best when you step onstage.
                                                                                6
Fueling Your Physique for Contest
Preparation



When most people think about bodybuilding diets, a restrictive meal plan filled
with nothing but dry chicken breast and broccoli eaten out of Tupperware
containers comes to mind. Make no mistake about it: Nutrition is key to reaching
stage-lean levels of body fat, and a competitor’s diet will be far from a free-for-
all. However, some nutrition practices commonly associated with the sport may
not be necessary and, in some cases, may be detrimental to progress. This
chapter outlines an effective nutrition approach for contest prep, including
guidance on how to make nutrition adjustments during contest prep to maintain
your target rate of fat loss and bring your best look to the stage every time!


ENERGY BALANCE
Before we dive into specific nutrition recommendations, it is important to
understand the important concept of energy balance. Energy balance is the
difference between your energy intake and energy expenditure. If you consume
more calories than you expend, you gain weight, but if you consume fewer
calories than you expend, you lose weight. This means that during contest prep,
you need to be in an energy deficit to achieve your target ROL.


Energy Intake
On the surface, this may seem incredibly simple. Since humans cannot create
their own energy from photosynthesis like plants do, energy intake only comes
from the foods eaten. However, several vital details regarding energy intake can
affect a competitor’s results. For example, the macronutrient (protein,
carbohydrate, and fat) composition of the diet may affect the type of weight
gained or lost. Moreover, consuming adequate micronutrition (vitamins and
minerals) is important for overall health. Competitors need to track intake
accurately and eat foods they enjoy on a schedule that allows them to stay
consistent. We will touch on factors associated with energy intake in this
chapter.


Energy Expenditure
On the other side of the energy balance equation is energy expenditure. This
seems simple as well. However, total daily energy expenditure is the sum of
the basal metabolic rate (the number of calories required for basic bodily
function), thermic effect of food (approximately 10 percent of calories
consumed are used to digest and absorb food), exercise activity, and
nonexercise activity (all the other movement a person does outside the gym
during the day). We will discuss recommendations for exercise and nonexercise
activity in chapter 7.
   To complicate this side of the equation, many energy expenditure components
are altered in response to both an energy deficit and weight loss, reducing total
daily energy expenditure and resulting in a weight loss plateau. (For the science
behind the reasons metabolism adapts during a diet, see references 30 and 49.)
Knowing how to adjust when a weight loss plateau occurs during contest prep is
the key to maintaining a target ROL, so this chapter covers how to adjust for
these variables.


CALORIC INTAKE
Before diving into caloric intake for contest prep, we will review appropriate
ROLs. Ultimately, caloric intake will be set to achieve a target ROL.
   As discussed in chapter 5, one of the most common mistakes competitors
make is not giving themselves enough time to diet for competition. This results
in a contest prep where weight is lost too quickly (thereby sacrificing muscle
mass), the competitor is not lean enough on show day, or both.
   A review on natural bodybuilding contest prep recommended that competitors
lose weight at an average 0.5 to 1 percent of body weight each week for optimal
muscle mass retention (21). Looking closer at the case studies on natural athletes
preparing for competition, those dieting at a ROL closer to 0.5 percent of body
weight weekly (19, 39) lost a lower percentage of weight as lean mass than those
dieting at a ROL of around 0.7 percent (24) and 1 percent (36) weekly,
respectively. Although more research is needed on this topic, these studies—
along with our observations in practice—suggest that slower ROLs are more
optimal for muscle retention during contest prep.
   This means that optimal ROLs for maximum muscle retention will likely be
0.5 to 1.25 pounds (0.2-0.6 kg) weekly for females and around 0.75 to 1.5
pounds (0.3-0.7 kg) weekly for males. To achieve the level of conditioning
required to be competitive onstage, give yourself plenty of time for a longer,
more gradual contest prep.


Determining Appropriate Caloric Intake
Once you have set aside enough time to diet for a competition, the next step is to
determine how many calories to consume. Although there are many equations
that exist to help calculate maintenance caloric intake, we find that many of them
are inaccurate when applied to real-life situations and are rather unnecessary. To
effectively and easily determine caloric intake, you must first know how many
calories you are currently consuming and how your body is responding to your
current intake. If you are currently tracking macronutrients or calories, this is
easy because you already know. Even if you are following a meal plan, you can
plug it into a nutrition tracking app to get a good idea of your current caloric
intake.
   However, if you do not know your current intake, track everything you eat or
drink for at least one week. Some people start altering things once they begin
tracking what they eat, and that can affect determining the appropriate number of
calories needed. Continue to eat normally, and do not change your diet so you
get an accurate picture of your current intake. Note how your weight is
changing. For example, if your weight is increasing, you are above your current
maintenance caloric intake, and if your weight is decreasing, you are below your
current maintenance intake. If your weight has been holding relatively stable,
this is your current maintenance caloric intake. It is simple.
    Once you have an idea of your current maintenance intake, you need to
reduce calories below this point to enter an energy deficit and achieve weight
loss. No diet, nutrient, or food source is going to change this fact. Many fad
diets, bodybuilding diets, and eating systems have tried to cheat this system, but
the cold, hard truth remains: If you are not in a caloric deficit, you will not lose
weight. Plain and simple.
    The next step is to determine how much to reduce your intake to create an
energy deficit. Many people think that since one pound (0.5 kg) of body fat is
approximately 3,500 calories, a 500-calorie daily deficit is needed to lose one
pound (0.5 kg) of body fat a week. It is a good starting point but in practice may
not always be the case due to differences in metabolic adaptation. Some people
require a larger reduction in caloric intake to see loss while others may be able to
get away with a smaller reduction. This has led researchers to question the
“3,500-calorie reduction equals one pound of weight loss” rule (48).
    If you have given yourself adequate time to diet for a show, it is typically best
to initially err on the side of a smaller deficit. From there, you can make small
adjustments to caloric intake and achieve an appropriate ROL. Using the
maximum intake possible means performance in the gym remains high, which
will help you retain more muscle. In addition, this approach gives you room
metabolically to make additional adjustments if or when plateaus occur along the
way.
    On the other hand, competitors pressed for time need to be more aggressive
with initial calorie reduction to ensure they see losses and do not fall behind. If
you are going to be aggressive, it is better to do so in the early stages of prep so
that you can get ahead of the curve and therefore be less aggressive down the
homestretch, when you are leaner and more susceptible to muscle loss. In either
situation, it will still be important to adjust caloric intake to achieve the target
ROL throughout contest prep.


Accuracy of Nutrition Tracking
Competing is an extreme goal, and extreme goals are rarely achieved without
extreme effort and measures. It will require more effort, precision, and sacrifice
than if your goal was less extreme. While this applies to many areas of contest
prep, a competitor has little room for error when accurately tracking nutrition.
    We mentioned that people tend to change their diets when tracking, but even
when they do not, humans are notoriously bad at tracking caloric intake. In large
nutrition surveys, average underreporting of calorie intake is as high as 70
percent in certain subgroups (29). This is a significant difference between
estimated and true intake. Perhaps the most classic example of caloric
underreporting is shown in a study published in the New England Journal of
Medicine in the 1990s (28). In this study, researchers recruited middle-age
overweight and obese women who claimed they were not losing weight on 1,200
calories or fewer daily. During the 14-day study, the women reported eating an
average just over 1,000 calories daily, but when researchers measured their
actual caloric intake, it was over 2,000 calories daily. This means that nothing
was “abnormal” about these women, and the real reason they were not losing
weight is because they were consuming nearly double the number of calories
they had thought.
    At this point, you probably think that you track your intake more accurately
than most people, including those from the aforementioned studies. While that is
probably true, underreporting even occurs in trained dietitians. Dietitians are
better at estimating intake than nondietitians, but even trained dietitians have
been found to underreport intake by over 200 calories daily on average (13).
    Untracked calories commonly come from several sources. Many people do
not count calories from fruits and vegetables; however, these are not “free”
foods, and they do have a caloric value. There are often errors associated with
weight versus volume measurements. For example, 1/4 cup of peanut butter
measured in a measuring cup may not weigh 2 ounces, and the macronutrient
values on a food label are based on weight measurements, not volume. We
recommend measuring weight rather than volume for this reason. Similarly,
people often give themselves too much leeway with measurements. For example,
if that 1/4 cup of peanut butter was heaping, and you consider it “close enough”
to 2 ounces, you may be consuming quite a few extra calories. Condiments,
beverages, vitamins, supplements, and any other food or beverage with a caloric
value can be a source of untracked calories.
    It is critical to look for errors in your tracking to ensure that you are accurate
during contest prep. As a rule, anything you eat or drink must be tracked.


 FAQ: What do I do if I fall off my nutrition plan for a
 day?
 Get back on track the next day! Often, competitors punish themselves by
 cutting food further or doing extra cardio. In most situations, this is not
 necessary and may even lead to bingeing and noncompliance down the road.
 However, if this day occurs too close to your show, you may need to push
 harder with less food and more cardio. Worst-case scenario, you may need to
 do a later competition.
    Typically, when someone overeats of out physiological hunger, he or she
 may take a few extra bites here and there, but if you are having an all-out
 binge, there is often an emotional component. Think about what emotions you
 were feeling at the time of the binge and look for the emotional triggers so
 that you can better handle the stressor the next time it comes around rather
 than turning to food. If bingeing issues become regular, it will be best to put
 competing on hold and address underlying issues related to food before
 dieting down for a competition.


MACRONUTRIENTS
Macronutrients are the energy-containing components of food and are an
important consideration as you determine what your diet will be. This is where
you get your calories from. The three macronutrients are protein, carbohydrate,
and fat.


Protein
Protein provides four calories per gram, and its role is to help repair and build
muscle tissue. In addition, proteins are involved in many processes that support
overall health, such as turnover of organ tissue, hormone production, antibody
production, and transport of nutrients and hormones throughout the body.
Therefore, adequate protein consumption is critical not only for maximizing
physique-related goals but also for overall health.

Common Food Sources
Protein is comprised of a combination of 20 amino acids. Protein sources are
classified as complete or incomplete based on their amino acid compositions.
Sources that contain adequate amounts of all 20 amino acids are complete
proteins, and those deficient in one or more amino acid are classified as
incomplete proteins. In general, animal sources of protein are complete sources,
and plant sources are incomplete sources. However, there are exceptions to this
rule. For example, quinoa and soy are complete sources of protein from plants.
   To prepare for a contest, a competitor must consume adequate amounts of all
amino acids; therefore, vegetarians must mix complementary protein sources to
prevent deficiencies. Foods high in protein include meat, fish, eggs, dairy, soy,
some grains (e.g., quinoa), protein bars, and protein shakes.

Recommended Intake
The current recommended daily allowance (RDA) of protein is 0.36 grams of
protein per pound of body weight per day. This may seem extremely low to
readers used to consuming at least one gram of protein per pound of body weight
per day. However, remember that the RDA is the amount of protein required to
support tissue turnover in sedentary healthy adults. This is not necessarily the
same amount required to optimize muscle repair and growth in a resistance-
trained athlete. A study in resistance-trained young women found that those who
consumed just over one gram of protein per pound of body weight per day
gained significantly more muscle mass than those consuming just above the
RDA (12). In addition, another study showed that the estimated average
requirement for protein intake in young bodybuilders may be as high as one
gram of protein per pound of body weight per day (6). These studies add to
scientific literature that supports a protein intake higher than the RDA to
maximize muscle growth in athletes.
    There is growing evidence that protein requirements are even higher for
someone in an energy deficit who is extremely lean and training hard. In fact, a
peer-reviewed paper on nutrition for natural bodybuilding contest prep
recommended a protein intake of 1 to 1.4 grams of protein per pound of lean
body weight per day (21). Considering most competitors preparing for a contest
have little body fat, this means that intakes over one gram of protein per pound
of body weight per day may be optimal for muscle retention during contest prep.
In addition, there is preliminary evidence that overfeeding protein in resistance-
trained athletes may result in less body fat accumulation than carbohydrate and
fat overfeeding (27). Therefore, a case could be made for even higher protein
intakes.
    Another benefit of high-protein diets is that they increase satiety during
weight loss, which means they can help combat hunger during contest prep (52).
In our own coaching careers, we have had great success prescribing protein
intakes as high as 1.3 to 1.8 grams of protein per pound of body weight for lean
bodybuilders. As we will see in the section about individuality, there are
situations where this may not be necessary.
    Regardless, during contest prep, a competitor has a limited number of calories
available to distribute between the three macronutrients. As a result, overfeeding
protein may limit carbohydrate or fat intake (or both), thereby potentially
negatively affecting results.
    We recommend starting with a protein intake of one gram of protein per
pound of body weight a day (or slightly more) to maximize muscle retention.
This approach gives a competitor enough remaining calories to consume
adequate amounts of carbohydrate and fat. If you find you can maintain your
target ROL on a higher caloric intake, increasing protein intake beyond one
gram per pound may be beneficial, provided you are still consuming adequate
carbohydrate and fat to support performance in the gym and hormone
production. However, if you have a significant amount of body fat to lose, you
may need to consume a protein intake lower than one gram per pound to also
consume enough carbohydrate and fat while staying in an energy deficit.


Dietary Fat
Fat is used for several processes in the body, including making up a large portion
of cell membranes and the myelin sheath around nerves, energy storage, body
heat, and hormone production (which may be of most interest to physique
athletes). Therefore, to combat hormone decline during contest prep, an adequate
fat intake will be key.

Common Food Sources
Dietary fat contains nine calories per gram and is commonly classified based on
its chemical structure. Saturated fatty acids do not contain double bonds, and
unsaturated fatty acids contain double bonds. Unsaturated fatty acids can be
further broken down into monounsaturated or polyunsaturated based on the
number of double bonds. The chemical conformation of a double bond can
classify a fatty acid as a trans fat.
   Fats are often labeled as “good” or “bad” based on their effects on health.
However, individual nutrient and health studies are often difficult because
humans do not eat just one food or nutrient. Consuming more unsaturated fat
(20, 32) and less trans fat (14) appears to be beneficial for health. However, the
data on saturated fat is less clear. Saturated fat was historically thought to cause
cardiovascular disease; however, research suggests that saturated fat does not
influence cardiovascular disease or mortality (14, 43). This area requires further
study.
   Fat is found in many foods, including nuts, seeds, oils, fatty fish (e.g.,
salmon), meat, egg yolks, and dairy.

Recommended Intake
A fat intake of 20 to 30 percent of daily calories has been recommended to
support adequate hormone production for natural bodybuilders preparing for
competition (21). Periods in which intake dips to 15 percent may be necessary to
help spare carbohydrates and protein, but we recommend minimizing the time
spent at extremely low fat intakes during contest prep to support adequate
hormone production.
    In addition, a person should consider how much of fat is truly needed even
though it is an essential nutrient. When starting a contest prep, protein is
important for muscle retention, carbohydrates are important for performance in
the gym, and fat is essential for proper hormone production. However, if
someone has a high caloric intake, a fat intake of 20 to 30 percent of total
calories might be more than necessary. So in this case, it may be advisable to
have fat intake at a lower percentage when calories are high and at a higher
percentage when calories are low.
    Fat intake should be set at a specific level to cover essential needs, and it
should be kept around that point throughout the duration of prep. In most cases,
carbohydrate intake should be the primary macronutrient that is decreased when
caloric reductions are needed. For example, if a competitor is consuming 2,000
calories and 55 grams of fat each day, this would constitute about a 25 percent
fat intake. However, if total calories are eventually dropped to 1,700 per day but
daily fat intake remains at 55 grams, this would constitute an intake of about 29
percent. Despite the increase in percentage, we recommend keeping fat intake
around a specific level as prep progresses.
    However, it should be noted that at some point, dietary fat may need to be
reduced to keep caloric intake at a place where the individual is still achieving
the target ROL. As we will discuss in the section on individual differences, there
is no one-size-fits-all macronutrient breakdown.

 FAQ: Are high-protein diets safe?
 At the time we wrote this book, there was no evidence that high protein
 intakes are detrimental to health in healthy individuals. In fact, a study in
 healthy resistance-trained males found that consuming 1.2 to 1.5 grams of
 protein per pound of body weight per day for an entire year produced no
 adverse effects on any marker of health measured (4). That study was
 extended to two years in a subset of subjects, and no detrimental effects were
 observed (3).
    Existing data in scientific literature does not seem to reveal any harm in
 exceeding the current recommendations. However, it may be wise to use
 caution with extremely high protein intakes during contest prep because you
 may cut into the number of calories available to allocate to carbohydrate and
 fat while staying in a caloric deficit. By consuming inadequate carbohydrate
 or fat, you may see greater muscle loss and suboptimal progress. Therefore,
 the increased protein demands during contest prep need to be balanced with
 carbohydrate and fat while staying within your caloric allotment.


Carbohydrate
Carbohydrates are the primary fuel source used during resistance training and
high-intensity, short-duration forms of cardio. In addition, carbohydrates are
stored in muscle as glycogen, which is used for energy during workouts.
Adequate carbohydrate consumption during contest prep can also help spare
muscle and reduce amino acid degradation.

Common Food Sources
Carbohydrates contain four calories per gram and are commonly classified based
on the number of sugars linked together in their chemical structures.
Monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, and galactose) are individual sugar
molecules, disaccharides (lactose, sucrose, and maltose) contain two sugar
molecules linked together, oligosaccharides contain 3 to 9 sugar molecules, and
polysaccharides contain 10 or more sugar molecules.
   Common sources of carbohydrates include grains, fruit, vegetables, legumes,
dairy, and added sugars (such as table sugar and honey).


 FAQ: Should I be concerned about sugar intake during
 contest prep?
 There is no evidence that sugar consumption affects fat loss if macronutrient
 requirements are met each day. Diets high in fructose (the sugar found in fruit)
 have not been shown to affect weight loss compared to low-fructose diets (7).
 Similarly, diets high in dairy (lactose) have not been shown to inhibit fat loss
 (1).
    However, foods high in added sugars are typically lower volume and
 higher calorie. Consuming a lot of calories from added sugar may lead to
 increased hunger due to a low food volume. In addition, many foods high in
 added sugars are micronutrient poor; therefore, we recommend consuming at
 least 80 to 90 percent of food from nutrient-dense foods to meet micronutrient
 needs.
    For competitors with a low carbohydrate intake (i.e., 100-150 g per day or
 less), it may be advisable to limit fruit to one serving a day. This has nothing
 to do with fruit’s effect on fat loss; however, fructose from fruit is primarily
 stored in the liver as glycogen, whereas glucose can be made into muscle
 glycogen. A diet high in fructose with a low carbohydrate intake may lead to
 further muscle glycogen depletion and a reduced performance in the gym.
 Therefore, it may be in your best interest to limit fruit intake to a certain
 extent if your carbohydrate intake is low.

Recommended Intake
A review of nutrition recommendations for bodybuilding contest prep suggests
that carbohydrate consumption should make up the remainder of your caloric
allotment once protein and fat are accounted for (21). In practice, we feel this
may be a good starting point for most.
   For example, if a 180-pound (82 kg) male is consuming 2,200 calories per
day, he will first want to ensure he is consuming at least one gram of protein per
pound of body weight; preferably even somewhat higher if he has the caloric
allotment to do so. In this example, we will set his protein at 220 grams daily.
He wants to keep fat in the 20 to 30 percent range to support hormone
production, so he sets fat at 55 grams daily. This leaves 825 calories for
carbohydrates, which are set at about 205 grams daily. Altogether, our
competitor’s starting daily macronutrient intake is 220 grams of protein, 205
grams of carbohydrates, and 55 grams of fat. Although individual needs may
differ, this would likely be a good starting point for most male competitors.


INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN
MACRONUTRIENT NEEDS
While it is easy to advise everyone to get into a caloric deficit and let nature take
its course, things are not always that simple. Anyone who has been in
bodybuilding for a significant amount of time notices that people react to diets
differently. It did not take us long in our coaching careers to realize that if we
gave a similar diet to two individuals who are the same height and weight, there
would be two entirely different outcomes.
   Figuring out individual diet differences comes from experience and trial and
error. However, over the years, we have noted a few recurring commonalities.
Let us look at several trends we have observed in our combined 30-plus years in
the sport.


Gender
A good place to start with individuality is the difference between men and
women. Women simply burn fewer calories at rest than men do. Research has
shown that women’s metabolic rates tend to be about 5 to 10 percent lower than
men’s metabolic rates (15). While this may not seem like a large difference, the
slower metabolic rate per pound combined with lower overall body weight
means many women require much lower caloric intakes. When you consider that
it is normal for metabolic rate to slow during a contest prep, this can lead to
some very low caloric intakes by the end of prep. This is completely normal.
    It may be harder for most women to lose weight, but we have noticed that
female competitors tend to retain more muscle mass during contest prep. While
we are not entirely sure why, we hypothesize that this has to do with the fact that
women’s muscle mass is not as dependent on testosterone. During contest prep,
men who are not using drugs see significant drops in testosterone, which can
cause loss of lean tissue (39). However, drug-free women have such low
testosterone levels to begin with that they will not see these losses during a
contest prep. Therefore, women can dig harder with their diets and cardio than
males and will not lose as much muscle. Because women require fewer calories,
we find that they can respond better to lower protein intakes than men do. If
protein is set too high, it will be hard to get total daily caloric intake as low as it
needs to be for fat loss.


Race
There is not a lot of talk about racial differences for diet and bodybuilding, most
likely because it is a sensitive subject. However, when you look at it from a
practical standpoint, if differences in environment over time have resulted in
differences in physical traits, it makes perfect sense that environment may affect
metabolism over time as well. In our experience, most African American and
Hispanic competitors tolerate a diet lower in carbohydrates and higher in protein
and fat. This is likely due to higher rates of insulin resistance within these racial
groups (18). To go along with reduced insulin sensitivity, African Americans in
general tend to have lower resting metabolic rates than Caucasians (46). When
you combine these factors, it can seem more difficult for African Americans to
lose fat than it is for Caucasians.
   Although it may be harder for African American competitors to get stage-
lean, our experience has shown us that, much like we just discussed with female
competitors, many African American competitors can maintain a higher level of
muscle mass while reaching very low body fat levels. With this knowledge, if
total caloric intake needs to get very low, protein intake should not be set too
high; otherwise fat loss might be slowed.


History
Last, but certainly not least, you can learn a lot about individuality based on
someone’s history. As coaches, we know gathering a competitor’s history is part
of learning about the person as an individual. If someone has typically had a
hard time losing weight, it is likely he or she will also have a harder time in the
future. In our experience, those with a history of “hard case” fat loss respond
better to plans lower in carbohydrates and higher in protein.


Macronutrient Examples for Men
When we look at primary individual differences, we can lay out a few examples
of how differing diets may be set up to meet specific needs. Let us begin with a
180-pound (82 kg) male Caucasian competitor who has an average metabolic
rate and a caloric intake of 2,200 calories. In our previous example in the
Recommended Intake section, we set it up as follows:
   ▶ Protein: 220 grams
   ▶ Carbohydrates: 205 grams
   ▶ Dietary fat: 55 grams
   An example of how this 180-pound (82 kg) Caucasian competitor may set up
a daily meal plan to hit these macronutrient targets can be found in table 6.1.
However, this is only one of millions of ways to set up a daily meal plan to hit
these macronutrient totals. Your daily meal plan will differ from this based on
your macronutrient needs, schedule, and food preferences.
   With this 2,200-calorie intake example, if this competitor was a 180-pound
(82 kg) African American competitor, we have had great success adjusting this
macronutrient ratio to look something more like this:
   ▶ Protein: 250 grams
   ▶ Carbohydrates: 140 grams
   ▶ Dietary fat: 70 grams
Table 6.2 provides a sample meal plan of how this 180-pound (82 kg) African
American male may meet his daily macronutrient allotment.
   Note that these meal plans are only meant to be an example and likely are not
best for you. Your specific meal plan will differ from tables 6.1 and 6.2 based on
your macronutrient requirements, schedule, and food preferences.

 FAQ: What is the best way to accurately measure my
 food?
 Measuring cup and spoon sizes are variable and not always standardized.
 Further error is introduced based on the degree a measurement is heaped.
 Also, there can be large variations between brands. Although these deviations
 may not seem significant, inaccurate measurements made multiple times a day
 will add up and contribute to caloric over- or underreporting. The best
 approach is to refer to the nutrition label of each specific food and use a scale
 to weigh each item separately.

Table 6.1 Sample Meal Plan A
                                                              DIETARY
                   AMOUNT*             PROTEIN   CARBOHYDRATE FAT
FOOD               (UNCOOKED)          (GRAMS)   (GRAMS)      (GRAMS)
Meal 1
Oatmeal (old-      20 g (1/4 cup)      2.5       13.5                1.5
fashioned)
Egg whites         300 g (≈10          33        2                   0
                   whites)
Low-fat cheese     28 g (1 oz slice)   7         0.5                 2
Salsa              28 g (1 Tbsp)       0         2                   0
Blueberries        100 g (1/2 cup)     1         14.5                0
Meal 2
Low-fat cottage    150 g (2/3 cup)     18        4.5                 2
cheese
Mixed nuts         28 g (1/4 cup)      5         6                   15
Banana             100 g (1            1         23                  0
                   medium)
Meal 3
(preworkout)
Chicken breast     200 g (1 cup        45        0                   5
(meat only)        chopped)
Brown rice (long   75 g (≈1/3 cup)     5.5       57                  2.5
grain)
Broccoli           200 g (2 cups)      5.5       13                  1
Postworkout
Whey protein           40 g (≈1-2          27               7                        3
powder (shake)         scoops)
Meal 4
Tilapia                150 g (≈5 oz)       30               0                        3
Sweet potato           150 g (≈6 in.       2.5              30                       0
                       long)
Iceberg lettuce        100 g (2 cups)      1                3                        0
Light salad            28 g (1 Tbsp)       0                1                        2
dressing
(vinaigrette)
Meal 5
Lean steak             150 g (≈5 oz)       33               0                        12
Red bell pepper        100 g (1/2 cup)     1                6                        0
(chopped)
Low-fat chocolate      60 g (≈1/2 cup)     2                20                       4
ice cream
TOTALS
Total                                      220              203                      53
Goal                                       220              205                      55
*The amounts for customary units in parentheses are approximations; for accuracy, we recommend using
metric weight. See the previous FAQ for more information.

Table 6.2 Sample Meal Plan B
                                                                          DIETARY
                       AMOUNT*               PROTEIN         CARBOHYDRATE FAT
FOOD                   (UNCOOKED)            (GRAMS)         (GRAMS)      (GRAMS)
Meal 1
Egg whites             400 g (≈13            44              3                        0
                       whites)
Low-fat cheese         28 g (1 oz slice)     7               0.5                      2
Salsa                  28 g (1 Tbsp)         0               2                        0
Blueberries            100 g (1/2 cup)       1               14.5                     0
Avocado                100 g (1/2 of a       2               9                        15
                   whole minus pit)
Meal 2
Low-fat cottage    150 g (2/3 cup)    18    4.5   2
cheese
Mixed nuts         28 g (1/4 cup)     5     6     15
Tuna (in water)    74 g (1 packet)    17    0     1
packet
Meal 3
(preworkout)
Chicken breast     200 g (1 cup       45    0     5
(meat only)        chopped)
Brown rice (long   75 g (≈1/3 cup)    5.5   57    2.5
grain)
Broccoli           200 g (2 cups)     5.5   13    1
Postworkout
Whey protein       40 g (≈1-2         27    7     3
powder (shake)     scoops)
Meal 4
Tilapia            175 g (6 oz)       35    0     3
Sweet potato       60 g (1/2 of       1     12    0
                   whole ≈5 in.
                   long)
Iceberg lettuce    100 g (2 cups)     1     3     0
Light salad        28 g (1 Tbsp)      0     1     2
dressing
(vinaigrette)
Meal 5
Lean steak         150 g (≈5 oz)      33    0     12
Red bell pepper    100 g (1/2 cup)    1     6     0
(chopped)
Almond butter      10 g (2 tsp)       2     2     6
(unsalted)
TOTALS
Total                                        250             140.5                    69.5

Goal                                         250             140                      70
*The amounts for customary units in parentheses are approximations; for accuracy, we recommend using
metric weight. See the FAQ for more information.


Macronutrient Examples for Women
In our previous example, we saw male competitors with caloric intakes set at
about 12.25 calories per pound of body weight. Protein intakes were set at about
1.2 grams per pound of body weight (Sample Meal Plan A) and about 1.4 grams
per pound of body weight (Sample Meal Plan B). Let us see how this might
work with a 115-pound (52 kg) female competitor.
   Since women have up to a 10 percent lower metabolic rate, we need to adjust
this caloric intake to about 11 calories per pound of body weight. This means our
female competitor needs roughly 1,265 calories. Let us see how we may set that
up for this female Caucasian competitor:
    ▶ Protein: 125 grams
    ▶ Carbohydrates: 101.25 grams
    ▶ Dietary fat: 40 grams
Notice that our protein intake is set slightly lower for this female competitor at
about 1.1 grams per pound of body weight. This is to account for the lower total
caloric intake needed. Now let us look at the plan for a 115-pound (52 kg)
African American female competitor consuming 1,265 calories daily:
    ▶ Protein: 138 grams
    ▶ Carbohydrates: 70.25 grams
    ▶ Dietary fat: 50 grams
In this instance, the changes are not substantial, but it would be much more
likely to produce consistent results for an African American competitor. On a
side note, once daily carbohydrate intake drops below 100 grams, we
recommend that at least 40 to 60 percent of carbohydrate intake come from a
variety of vegetables. This not only ensures nutritional needs are met but also
helps with satiety.
   While these examples only scratch the surface of the nearly infinite
adjustments that can be made to account for individuality, they show how
differing macronutrient ratios can be set up to help various populations. There
are no hard rules. Although one population may be “more likely” to have
specific needs, there are always exceptions. For this reason, we recommend
looking at your individual needs and history as the primary indicators for how to
set up your macronutrient ratios.


FIBER
Fiber is a carbohydrate not digested by human enzymes and is instead fermented
by bacteria in the large intestine. There are a number of benefits of high-fiber
diets (reviewed by (2)). The most notable for bodybuilders is that fiber increases
satiety. Therefore, consuming a high-fiber diet makes you feel fuller than if your
diet was low in fiber. Anyone who has been stage-lean will tell you that
managing hunger and taking the edge off when consuming a lower caloric intake
can go a long way toward increased adherence and success during contest prep.
   Fermentation of fiber in the large intestine produces many byproducts,
including short-chain fatty acids, which are absorbed by our bodies and used for
energy. Therefore, fiber has a caloric value estimated as 1.5 to 2.5 calories per
gram, depending on the composition of the fiber source. This is less than
carbohydrates, which contain 4 calories per gram. However, to avoid confusion,
count fiber along with other carbohydrates consumed and aim to have a
consistently high fiber intake.
   The Institute of Medicine recommends that adults consume at least 14 grams
of fiber for every 1,000 calories consumed. This means that someone consuming
2,500 calories daily during contest prep should aim to get at least 35 grams of
fiber daily. This level of fiber intake may not be possible when carbohydrate
intake is low during contest prep. In this situation, it may be more practical to
aim for at least 10 grams per 1,000 calories consumed.
   It is common for fiber intake to increase during contest prep as a competitor
consumes more high-volume, low-calorie foods to combat hunger. However,
high fiber intakes can cause gastrointestinal (GI) distress. If you notice GI
symptoms from consuming high amounts of fiber, reduce fiber intake to a better
tolerated level.


VITAMINS AND MINERALS
Bodybuilders have historically eliminated several foods or even entire food
groups when preparing for competition. Older bodybuilder case studies from the
1980s and 1990s reveal that it was common to eliminate fruit, dairy, sugar, egg
yolks, and even red meat due to the fear that these foods would interfere with fat
loss (22, 26, 47). As a result, it was also common for these competitors to be
deficient in many vitamins and minerals, including calcium since complete
elimination of dairy was part of the normal approach (22, 25, 26, 40).
   There is no need to eliminate any food, nutrient, or food group during contest
prep unless you have a diagnosed medical reason to do so. If anything, the
deficiencies caused by this approach may negatively affect results. No food or
food group will prevent weight loss. When individuals are in an energy deficit,
they can literally eat anything they want and still lose weight, provided they
remain in an energy deficit.
   A study comparing the acute effects of a meal consisting of a Big Mac, fries,
and a root beer from McDonald’s to a homemade organic burger meal in which
macronutrient intake was matched revealed no difference in insulin, glucose,
free-fatty acids, blood lipids, or hunger hormones (9). In addition, several
interesting case studies have been done to challenge the claim that food source
matters more than energy balance for weight loss. John Cisna, a high school
science teacher, lost a significant amount of weight only eating food from
McDonald’s because he was in a caloric deficit and exercising.
   Dr. Mark Haub, a nutrition professor at Kansas State University, consumed a
convenience-store diet consisting primarily of foods such as Twinkies. Dr. Haub
lost a significant amount of weight because he was in a caloric deficit daily.
Beyond these examples, thousands of bodybuilders get stage-lean every year
without eliminating any food or food group. Although these studies have not
been published in peer-reviewed journals or undergone the scrutiny of the peer-
review process, they clearly show that energy balance drives weight loss, not
food source.
   Before you make McDonald’s and Twinkies the staples of your next contest
prep diet, there are a few things you need to keep in mind. The first is that you
are still a human being, which means you have vitamin and mineral
requirements that need to be met. In addition, when you are dieting, hunger will
increase. Consuming one Twinkie to get 30 grams of carbohydrate is not going
to satisfy you as much as consuming about two and a half cups of steamed
broccoli to get 30 grams of carbohydrate. Therefore, in the interest of
performance in the gym, muscle retention, dietary adherence, and overall health,
consume a variety of foods from all food groups to meet your macronutrient
needs. Also, aim for multiple colors in your fruits and vegetables to consume a
variety of micronutrients.
   Again, unless you have a diagnosed medical condition that requires you to
eliminate a food or food group (e.g., lactose intolerance or celiac disease), there
is no reason to eliminate anything if your macronutrient needs are being met
consistently.
   Some individuals may find that it is easy to have a different meal plan each
day during contest prep, and others may find preparing their meals for the week
ahead of time to eat the same meal plan daily works best to stay consistent. For
those eating the same meal plan daily, it may be in your best interest to rotate in
different foods each week. For example, have broccoli as a vegetable one week,
have carrots instead the next week.
   It may also be helpful to incorporate a combination of nutrient-dense food
sources with other foods you want to eat. A good way to do this is to use an
80/20 or 90/10 approach, where you are consuming most of the food (at least
80%-90%) from nutrient-dense sources with other things you want in
moderation (e.g., a serving of ice cream). However, as caloric intake is reduced,
and you get closer to stage-lean, this ratio may start looking more like 95/5, 99/1
or even 100/0 because nutrient-dense whole foods are often more filling and can
help keep hunger levels in check. Ultimately, the approach that allows you to
meet your macro- and micronutrient needs while adhering to your plan daily is
the approach that works best for you.


 FAQ: Can I have artificial sweeteners during contest
 prep?
 Artificial sweeteners are sugar substitutes that provide a sweet flavor with a
 lower caloric value than sugar. Research has shown that artificial sweeteners
 in amounts typically consumed by humans is safe (31). However, not all
 artificial sweeteners are calorie-free. Therefore, account for any calories into
 your daily allotment. If calories are accounted for, there is no evidence that
 artificial sweeteners affect fat loss (37).
     It is common for competitors to consume an increasing amount of artificial
 sweeteners throughout contest prep to fight hunger. However, large amounts
 of artificial sweeteners (or sugar alcohols) can cause GI distress. If you
 experience GI distress from using artificial sweeteners, reduce how much you
 consume.


MEAL FREQUENCY
Bodybuilders have historically eaten more frequent, smaller meals daily. In fact,
previous case studies on bodybuilders preparing for competition have reported as
many as 10 meals a day (47). On the other extreme, intermittent fasting has
gained popularity in the fitness community. Individuals using this approach
consume food within a given time each day. Anecdotally, competitors have
stepped onstage claiming success using both approaches; however, what does
the scientific literature say?
   Numerous studies on meal frequency and weight loss have not observed a
difference in weight loss when daily calories are matched (11). Moreover,
intermittent fasting has not been shown to be superior to more traditional meal
patterns (42). Therefore, it does not appear that the number of meals consumed
throughout the day affects weight loss if calorie intake is low enough to induce
weight loss. From an applied standpoint, this means your meal frequency should
be based on your schedule, preferences, and what allows you to stay consistent
with your macronutrient intake each day.
   However, scientific literature about meal frequency mostly reports studies
done for overweight and obese individuals during weight loss interventions. This
is a significantly different population than a bodybuilder dieting down to an
extremely lean body composition. Bodybuilders need to also be highly
concerned with muscle retention, not just weight loss.


PROTEIN TIMING
Consumption of a meal containing protein stimulates muscle protein synthesis
(MPS), the rate at which new proteins are created in muscle tissue to repair and
build tissue. However, the increase in MPS is short-lived (8). Therefore,
bodybuilders have historically believed that more meals are better when it comes
to keeping MPS elevated. However, there is evidence that if meals are spaced
too closely together, the second meal may not have the same increase in MPS as
the first (8). As a result, a paper on nutrition guidelines for bodybuilding contest
prep recommended a more moderate meal frequency of three to six protein-
containing meals daily to optimize muscle repair and growth (21). We agree that
this would be a good starting point for most competitors.
   There is also evidence that certain times may be more critical for protein
(meal) consumption. Bodybuilders have notoriously consumed protein shakes
immediately postworkout so that they did not miss out on the “anabolic window
of opportunity.” This is the time where MPS increases due to the combination of
exercise and nutrition. However, research has shown that this window lasts at
least 24 hours, with the greatest benefits shown within the first three hours after
exercise (33). Therefore, we recommend consuming a meal containing protein
within one or two hours postworkout.
   A meta-analysis looking specifically at consumption of postworkout protein
shakes failed to find a statistically significant difference in muscle size or
strength gains when daily total protein intake was matched (41). However, there
was a small trend toward favorable outcomes with postworkout protein shake
consumption. For a bodybuilder looking for any possible small advantage, this
may be enough to warrant consuming a protein shake after working out. There
would not be any negatives if the shake protein content fits into your daily
macronutrient numbers.
   There is evidence that consuming protein before bed may have beneficial
effects on muscle repair and growth (34). Therefore, we recommend consuming
a meal containing protein immediately before going to bed. Although it is only
anecdotal evidence, we have also found that consuming a larger meal before
going to bed may help improve the quality of sleep for some competitors,
especially when they reach extremes in body composition.


CARBOHYDRATE TIMING
Maintaining strength in the gym is key to holding on to muscle mass throughout
contest prep. The primary fuel source used during resistance exercise is
carbohydrate. Much of this carbohydrate comes from muscle glycogen (the
storage form of carbohydrate in muscle). Studies have shown that lifting weights
in a glycogen-depleted state reduces strength and increases fatigue compared to
preworkout carbohydrate consumption (16). Therefore, a high-carbohydrate
meal one to three hours preworkout may increase performance.
   In practice, the exact number of carbohydrates consumed in this meal may
differ between individuals. Some have improved performance in the gym after a
large, high-carbohydrate meal, whereas others may feel like they want to take a
nap after the same meal. For those in the latter group, it is best to adjust
preworkout carbohydrate intake based on individual tolerance and performance.
   Carbohydrate consumption during and after a workout has widely been
studied in aerobic endurance athletes, where fast-digesting carbohydrates have
been shown to increase performance and reduce fatigue (23). Resistance training
does not deplete as much glycogen as aerobic endurance exercise does (35);
however, there is reason to believe that a person dieting for a competition
consuming a low-calorie and low-carbohydrate diet and becoming very lean may
be glycogen depleted. Therefore, intraworkout consumption of a small amount
of fast-digesting carbohydrate (e.g., dextrose) may improve performance. In
practice, many people note that they feel this helps gym performance, especially
deep in contest prep. Like postworkout protein shake consumption, intraworkout
carbohydrate consumption will not negatively affect progress as long as the
carbohydrates are accounted for in your daily macronutrient allotment.
   One tactic we have used with great results regarding carbohydrate intake flies
directly in the face of common bodybuilding lore. Historically, many
bodybuilders eliminate nighttime carbohydrates to lose fat. However, we have
had success adding a substantial carbohydrate meal before bed for those who
have the calories to allow it. A small amount of research shows that this could
possibly cause greater fat loss (45). If it does, it is most likely due to improved
sleep quality. Since bodybuilders typically have poor sleep quality during
contest prep, carbohydrates immediately before bed can be a great tool to
improve sleep and therefore improve recovery and fat loss. It should once again
be stated that this tactic will only work for those who have enough carbohydrates
to spare in their diets, and pretraining carbohydrate intake should always take
priority over bedtime carbohydrate consumption.
   In summary, we recommend consuming three to six protein-containing meals
per day. It would also be advisable to consume one of these meals within one to
two hours postworkout (possibly as a postworkout shake) and one before bed.
Carbohydrate consumption preworkout should be based on individual tolerance
and performance. Moreover, consuming a fast-digesting carbohydrate during a
workout may help maintain performance when energy intake and body fat are
low. Ultimately, your meal pattern and frequency should allow you to
consistently hit your macronutrient numbers each day because without doing so,
progress will be suboptimal.


REFEEDS
It is common for competitors to cycle carbohydrate or calorie intake throughout
the week. Many believe this helps keep metabolic rate elevated; however, there
is limited evidence that a single high-carbohydrate or a high-calorie day has a
significant effect on metabolic rate. No published data suggests that complex
carbohydrate cycling plans are superior for weight loss versus a consistent
carbohydrate intake throughout the week as long as weekly calorie and
macronutrient intakes are matched.
    But there may be some benefits to incorporating a high-carbohydrate day into
your contest prep plan. During periods of low calorie and carbohydrate intake,
muscle glycogen stores become depleted. Glycogen in muscle is used for energy
during weightlifting, meaning that a depletion of glycogen can reduce
performance in the gym. However, a high-carbohydrate day can increase
glycogen stores and improve performance during a tough workout (17).
Therefore, it may be in your best interest to place a high-carbohydrate refeed day
on the day of (or the day before) one of your toughest workout sessions.
    Another benefit of a refeed day is that it can allow you to fit in other foods
you may be craving. This diet flexibility may reduce the risk of bingeing,
thereby improving adherence (44). From an applied standpoint, this mental break
is one of the most beneficial effects of a refeed day, even if other claims
regarding the benefits of refeeding (such as the effect on metabolic rate) prove to
be untrue.


A Structured Refeed Day or a Cheat Day?
Competitors who are dieting for shows often use a refeed day as a “cheat day” or
“cheat meal,” where they allow themselves to eat anything they want without
restriction. However, there are several reasons this is likely not optimal for fat
loss and why it would be in your best interest to use a structured refeed day if
you are going to include one.
    There is no evidence that any individual food causes weight gain or prevents
fat loss. Therefore, there is no reason for a healthy competitor to exclude any one
food from a diet during contest prep. Instead of eliminating foods or food
groups, eat a variety of nutrient-dense foods, fitting in less nutrient-dense foods
in moderation while staying within your daily caloric allotment.
   And calories from a cheat day still count. Your weight decreases weekly
during contest prep if the number of calories consumed throughout the week is
lower than the number of calories burned throughout the week. However, if you
consume enough calories during your cheat day to offset the calorie deficit
created throughout the rest of the week, weight loss will stall.
   If a cheat day is turning into an all-out binge, your dietary pattern can begin
to look like an eating disorder, where you restrict food for a large portion of the
week and a binge on your cheat day. Competing should enhance your life, not
detract from it; therefore, you should try to maintain a healthy relationship with
food during contest prep.
   Uncontrolled cheat days may also make adjustments difficult. As mentioned
previously, plateaus are a normal part of weight loss, and they will happen
throughout your contest prep. When this occurs, a reduction in caloric intake or
increase in activity is necessary to keep weight loss progressing. However, if you
incorporate cheat days, the intake on that day may be unclear. Intake may differ
from cheat day to cheat day and increase as you get leaner and hungrier, making
meaningful adjustments difficult when plateaus occur.
   Many proposed benefits of a high-calorie day during a diet are due to an
increased carbohydrate intake. Hormones that affect metabolic rate, such as
leptin and thyroid hormone, are much more responsive to carbohydrate
overfeeding than to protein or fat overfeeding (5, 38). Therefore, to make the
most out of a higher-calorie day, it may be in your best interest to increase
carbohydrate intake and not necessarily fat intake as many do during a cheat day.


Refeed Recommendations
For individuals incorporating a refeed day into contest prep, a good starting
point would be to increase carbohydrate intake to 1.5 to 2 times your normal
intake once every 4 to 10 days. Try to line up refeeds with your hardest workouts
so that you are refeeding the day before or the day of your most difficult
workout to maximize performance. You may also want to reduce protein and fat
intake slightly on your refeed days if caloric intake is low and you notice a large
spike in weight after refeeding.
Multiday Refeeds
As mentioned previously, a refeed day does not have a significant lasting effect
on metabolic rate or hormones. However, there is some preliminary evidence
that having more than one high-calorie or high-carbohydrate day a week may
have a greater effect on weight loss (51). Although this topic requires further
study, in practice, a few competitors have begun to implement refeeds on two or
even three consecutive days with success.
   However, weekly caloric intake and energy balance still determine weight
change. Therefore, the more refeed days you incorporate, the more caloric intake
will need to be reduced on other days.
   For example, if you are a female who needs to consume 10,000 calories
weekly to see fat loss, your average daily caloric intake for the week needs to be
roughly 1,430 calories. If you incorporate a refeed day of 1,700 calories, then
your regular days need to be reduced to roughly 1,380 calories to maintain your
weekly caloric deficit. However, if you incorporate three consecutive refeeds of
1,700 calories each week, then the remaining four days must be 1,225 calories to
maintain your weekly deficit.
   As the number of refeeds increase, at some point, you will likely hit a point of
diminished returns, where intake on the remaining days is so low that it
negatively affects performance in the gym and recovery. This is important to
keep in mind if you decide to incorporate multiday refeeds.


DIET BREAKS
Contrary to its name, a diet break is not a free-for-all. Instead, a diet break can
be considered a prolonged refeed. Refeeds are a one-, two-, or three-day period
where calorie intake is higher, and a diet break is typically one or more weeks of
an intake around your current maintenance. This likely has a larger effect on
hormone levels and metabolic rate than a refeed day. In addition, it may provide
a beneficial mental break from a calorie deficit that can improve motivation and
dietary adherence.
   The goal of a diet break is not to see weight loss but to hold weight steady.
However, preliminary studies have found that a diet break does not affect total
weight loss (53) and may even have a beneficial effect on weight loss progress
(10).
   Therefore, for those with lengthy contest preps, it may not be a bad idea to
incorporate diet breaks periodically. This may help keep dietary adherence
higher and has beneficial effects on the declines in hormones and metabolic rate
that occur during contest prep.
   However, we caution about a diet break too close to stage-lean because this
essentially prolongs the period in which you stay at an unsustainable body fat
and feel the negative effects of contest prep. If you incorporate diet breaks, take
them before the final push, when you are feeling the effects of being
unsustainably lean.


MONITORING PROGRESS
A variety of strategies can help track of a competitor’s progress to lose body fat
during the content prep process. Obvious methods are weighing in on a scale and
taking progress photos, but monitoring strength levels and measuring body fat
can be used also.


Body Weight
To achieve stage-lean levels of body fat, competitors must maintain their target
ROLs. Clearly, this means the scale is one method to monitor progress. We
recommend weighing in daily to monitor trends and averages over time rather
than looking at weight on one specific day.
    Weight fluctuations of up to three to five pounds (1.4-2.3 kg) (or even more
in some people) from one day to the next are completely normal, even while
eating the same thing each day. There are several reasons weight may fluctuate
from one day to the next, including sleep patterns, bowel movements, water
intake, sweat, stress, hormones, how close you ate to weighing in, and salt
intake. However, one thing all these factors have in common is that the changes
in weight are the result of water weight or intestinal food mass and not real
tissue weight (muscle or fat).
    That is why it is important to look at changes in weight over a longer period
(i.e., weeks or months) rather than just one day to the next. Look at averages
when assessing progress because this can help smooth out some daily
fluctuation. We recommend assessing changes in weekly average weights. If
your weekly average weight is decreasing at your target ROL, things are likely
heading in the right direction.
   If you find yourself stressing over the changes from one day to the next,
consider weighing in less often. But, weigh yourself more than once a week so
that you are not basing adjustments on a single weigh-in each week, which can
have a good amount of error. Ultimately, if reducing anxiety about the number
on the scale increases your enjoyment of the process, it also will increase the
likelihood that you remain consistent and reach your goal.


 FAQ: How should a woman handle weight fluctuations
 due to her menstrual cycle?
 Many women have an increase in weight the week before or the week of their
 monthly menstrual cycles. This fluctuation is due to water weight and is not
 real tissue weight. If you are a female competitor, note when this fluctuation
 occurs each month so that you take it into account when assessing your
 progress. When your weight increases due to your cycle, it will typically be
 best to continue to stay consistent and see where your weight stabilizes after
 your cycle. Often, you will be pleased to see that consistency during your
 cycle has resulted in a nice postcycle loss.


Progress Pictures
Although the scale can be a great marker of progress over the short-term, being
stage-lean is not a specific number on the scale; it is a look. Therefore, progress
pictures are a key to assessing progress.
   However, be honest with your progress pictures. In an age where everything
on social media is done with perfect angles, the best lighting, and special filters
(and often a good muscle pump too), your progress pictures should not have any
of these. You need an honest assessment of how your whole body looks hitting
the poses in your division in lighting that may not be “the best.” We would also
advise not taking progress pictures as a “selfie” using a mirror and instead use
consistent lighting and conditions for each set of pictures.
   In addition, we would advise against frequent pictures, especially early on in
contest prep, because visual progress will take time with slower target ROLs.
Therefore, it may be in your best interest to take progress pictures every two to
four weeks in the early stages of contest prep, and increase that frequency to
every one to two weeks as your competition gets closer.


Strength
Strength loss is common during contest prep, especially in drug-free competitors
(39). However, a competitor’s goal should be to maintain strength as much as
possible during contest prep. Monitoring strength levels can be a great way to
assess progress because if the scale is trending down and strength is holding, it is
a good sign that you are holding on to muscle mass while dropping body fat.
Given enough time and enough change, this should result in the visual changes
you are looking for, and your progress pictures will show that as well.


Body Fat Tests
It is common for a competitor with stage-lean levels of body fat to be asked,
“What is your body fat percentage?” In reality, this does not matter because the
judges are not getting out calipers (or a scale) when you step onstage. We have
found that the competitors walking around telling everyone their body fat
percentages are not that lean. If they were, they would not need to say anything.
It would be obvious.
    If you have your body fat measured during contest prep, we advise taking the
results with a grain of salt. Studies show that body fat measurements in
bodybuilders have quite a bit of error, more than most competitors realize
(especially for methods commonly available to competitors, such as bioelectrical
impedance analysis) (50). This means that the number the test gives you may be
significantly different than your true body fat. It also means that you are going to
need to see a large change in body fat between measurements to be sure that the
difference in body fat measured is real body fat loss and not just a random
measurement error. To minimize error in body fat measurements as much as
possible, use more precise measurement techniques, such as dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA).
    Regardless of the technique that you use, take your measurement at the same
time and under the same conditions. Typically, it is easiest to do this first thing
in the morning before eating, wearing minimal clothing, and after emptying your
bladder. It is also best that you do not have a refeed day the day before your
measurement to minimize water and glycogen fluctuation.
    Although a test’s standardization reduces the error of the measurement, all
measurements have error. If you take body composition measurements during
contest prep, do not label your prep as a success or a failure based on body fat
measurement numbers. Take the results in context with body weight, visual
results, and strength changes to get a full picture of what is happening during
your contest prep.


PLATEAUS
Plateaus are a normal part of the fat-loss process. During contest prep, you can
expect to hit several plateaus. These plateaus occur due to the body’s metabolic
adaptation from several factors, such as weight loss, lean mass loss, reduced
voluntary and involuntary movement outside the gym (also known as NEAT,
nonexercise adaptive thermogenesis), reduced hormone levels (e.g., leptin,
thyroid, testosterone, and estrogen), increased mitochondrial efficiency, and
increased extraction of nutrients by the microbes in the GI tract (as reviewed by
30, 49).


Making Adjustments
If you are not losing weight, you need to reduce intake, increase activity, or both
to create an energy deficit again. Double-check that you are consistently
following the plan. This includes consistently meeting your macronutrient
numbers and getting in all cardio and workouts. Perhaps the biggest thing to
double-check is whether you are tracking your nutritional intake accurately and
not underreporting calories, something very common (28, 29) even in trained
dietitians (13). For this reason, ensuring you are accurately accounting for
everything you are eating is incredibly important. If you find that you have not
been consistent, keep everything as is and focus on consistency first before
determining if adjustments are necessary.
    If you are accounting for everything you are consuming, being consistent
with your macro numbers, and getting all your workouts in and still not losing
weight, then you need to decrease your caloric intake, increase your activity
level, or both to get you back into an energy deficit. We discuss adjustments to
both exercise and nonexercise activity in the next chapter. However, for now, we
will focus on changes in energy intake.
    It is a common mistake to make large adjustments each time a plateau occurs.
However, often only a small adjustment (50-150 calories per day) is necessary to
keep weight loss moving appropriately. Reduce these calories from carbohydrate
(and possibly fat) while keeping protein high to protect against muscle loss.
   Ultimately, your goal should be to keep caloric intake as high as possible
while still seeing an appropriate ROL. This way, there is room to make further
adjustments if or when additional plateaus occur along the way. Always having
something in your back pocket that you can pull out when a plateau occurs will
ensure that you can continue to lose weight and progress toward your goal of
looking your best onstage.

Take-Home Points
   ▶ Aim for 0.5 to 1 percent of body weight loss weekly on average, sticking
    to the lower end of this range if possible. Consume as many calories as
    possible while seeing this ROL.
   ▶ Consume 1 to 1.4 grams of protein per pound of lean body weight, 20 to
    30 percent of calories from fat, and the remainder of your daily caloric
    allotment from carbohydrate while eating at least 10 to 14 grams of fiber
    per 1,000 calories consumed. Be aware that this is a good starting point for
    many, but not necessarily a one-size-fits-all, and some competitors may
    need a different macronutrient breakdown for optimal progress.
   ▶ There is no need to eliminate any food, food group, or macronutrient
    unless you have a diagnosed medical reason to do so. Instead, eat a variety
    of foods from all food groups to prevent vitamin and mineral deficiencies.
   ▶ Consume three to six protein-containing meals daily with special
    attention to protein post-workout and before bed. Base preworkout and
    intraworkout carbohydrate intake on tolerance and performance in the
    gym.
   ▶ Consider incorporating a higher-carbohydrate day every 4 to 10 days to
    help performance during a tough workout and provide a mental break.
    There may also be added benefits to multiple high-carbohydrate days in a
    row or a diet break periodically during contest prep.
   ▶ Plateaus are a normal part of the weight loss process. When they occur,
    reduce caloric intake only a small amount (primarily from carbohydrate
    and fat in most cases) to restore target rate of weekly loss while
    consuming as many calories as possible.
                                                                               7
Tweaking Your Physique for Contest
Preparation



As mentioned earlier, to maintain your target ROL during contest prep, you need
to be in an energy deficit, where energy intake is lower than energy expenditure.
In the previous chapter, we discussed how to adjust your nutrition plan to reduce
energy intake while holding on to as much muscle mass as possible during
contest prep. In this chapter, we discuss the components of energy expenditure:
exercise and nonexercise activity. We also focus on how to create an effective
resistance training plan to minimize muscle loss during contest prep.


INCREASING ENERGY
EXPENDITURE
It is important to consider energy expenditure, not just calorie reduction, when
attempting to create an energy deficit. A plan to burn calories inside and outside
the gym will support your bodybuilding efforts, giving you the lean look you
seek. The two most modifiable components of total daily energy expenditure are
exercise and nonexercise activity.


Cardio Training
The most common way to increase exercise energy expenditure is by adding
cardio. Historically, bodybuilders add a lot of cardio when starting contest prep
to create a significant energy deficit and achieve a rapid ROL. However, you
should shoot for slower ROLs than bodybuilders have historically; therefore,
these extremes likely are not necessary for most competitors. This section
outlines an evidence-based approach to adding cardio during contest prep.

Amount of Cardio
It is entirely possible to create an energy deficit without cardio; however, this is
not realistic for most people because it would require an extremely low caloric
intake that may make dietary adherence difficult. In addition, an extremely low
intake may adversely affect performance in the gym and recovery between
workouts. Therefore, for most competitors, some level of cardio is necessary.
    Historically, bodybuilders have done long durations of cardio daily from the
start of contest prep. However, this may not be optimal for muscle retention
while dieting. In fact, a study found that the more cardio a person does, the more
it interferes with strength and size gains from lifting weights (44). This
interference may be greater in advanced athletes (most people stepping onstage
would be considered advanced athletes if they are giving themselves adequate
training time before a show) (5).
    Taken together, this suggests that you should aim to do as little cardio as
possible while still seeing your target rate of weight loss. This does not mean
you will be doing no cardio, and most competitors require cardio to get stage-
lean. However, it will be in your best interest to achieve your target ROL on as
little cardio as necessary at a given time. If you can get stage-lean through
caloric changes only, then we would recommend that you do so, but if you are
not so lucky, then you should keep cardio as low as possible during prep.


 FAQ: Should I do cardio fasted?
 Doing cardio first thing in the morning before eating is commonly the cardio
 choice of bodybuilders because they believe that it results in greater fat loss.
 However, a study directly comparing fasted- and fed-state cardio observed no
 difference in weight loss, fat loss, or body composition (28). Therefore,
 competitors can feel free to perform cardio fasted or fed based on individual
 preference.
Intensity of Cardio
Many individuals do lower-intensity forms of cardio because more fat is burned
during exercise; however, studies comparing low- and high-intensity forms of
cardio observed no difference in fat burned throughout the day (20, 27). This is
because a greater amount of fat is burned following higher-intensity forms of
cardio. In addition, high-intensity cardio interferes less with strength and size
gains (44).
    Before switching to an exclusively high-intensity cardio plan, there are other
considerations. High-intensity cardio is more difficult to recover from than
lower-intensity forms. Recovery ability may be reduced in a caloric deficit,
where recovery abilities are not as high as in the off-season. In addition, the high
intensity may cause issues with preexisting joint conditions or even create joint
or injury issues if the amount of high-intensity cardio performed exceeds
recovery ability.
    Another consideration is that research on high-intensity cardio and
interference with strength and size gains was not conducted on dieting
bodybuilders who have fuel in short supply. From a practical standpoint, high-
intensity cardio can be problematic for a bodybuilder in prep. The primary fuel
source for intense resistance training is glucose. Glucose is also the primary fuel
for high-intensity cardio. Therefore, performing high-intensity cardio robs fuel
from your resistance training. In the off-season, when a bodybuilder is
adequately fed, this is not a problem. However, during a contest prep, when
calories and carbohydrates are restricted, this can be a big problem. Also,
recovery ability is already hindered during contest prep, and high-intensity
cardio can worsen the situation. On the other hand, little recovery is needed after
going for a 30-minute walk.
    Because high-intensity cardio can take away fuel from your resistance
training and then hinder recovery from resistance training, we recommend that
you use high-intensity cardio very sparingly or possibly reduce or eliminate its
use entirely as a contest prep progresses and calories get lower. It is not
uncommon to only tolerate one or two high-intensity interval training sessions
weekly without affecting performance. From there, you should add steady-state
cardio for any additional cardio needs. Many people may not do well with high-
intensity cardio and may need to stick to low- and moderate-cardio intensities
instead.
 FAQ: If I am lifting weights and doing cardio in the
 same workout, which should I do first?
 At times during contest prep, it may be necessary to perform cardio and
 resistance training in the same session. In this circumstance, it will be in your
 best interest to perform weights before cardio. Performing cardio immediately
 before resistance training has been shown to reduce strength gain (25).
 Performing cardio after resistance training lowers injury risk versus
 performing resistance training following an intense cardio session. For
 example, think about trying to perform heavy barbell squats after a high-
 intensity interval session of sprints.
     It is important to space out higher-intensity forms of cardio and resistance
 training workouts using the same muscle groups. For example, we would
 recommend not doing a high-intensity interval cardio session on the spin bike
 the day before performing heavy squats.


Nonexercise Activity Thermogenesis
Most competitors only think “cardio” when discussing ways to increase energy
expenditure. However, nonexercise activity can play a huge role in creating an
energy deficit and maintaining target ROL. NEAT is all other movement you do
outside the gym. This includes voluntary activity, like work, cleaning, shopping,
recreational activity, or walking a pet as well as involuntary activity like
twitching and fidgeting.
   There are large person-to-person variations in NEAT (17). Much of the
variation is due to differences in profession. Clearly, it is not realistic to change
your profession just to diet for a bodybuilding competition, and you cannot
change how much you fidget; however, you can make a conscious effort to move
more throughout the day outside of your time in the gym.

Role of NEAT in Bodybuilding
During contest prep, when you are extremely lean and energy intake is low,
NEAT will decrease to conserve energy (13). This reduction is a large
contributor to metabolic adaptation and the weight loss plateaus normal to the
dieting process (18, 40). For those who have been stage-lean, this likely makes
complete sense. You can relate to the fact that you move less when stage-lean
because you feel tired and sluggish. However, this only reduces your total daily
energy expenditure. Therefore, stay active outside the gym and keep NEAT
elevated during contest prep.

Increasing NEAT During Contest Prep
One effective way to increase NEAT is to track daily steps (3). This can be done
using fancy watches, cell phone apps, or even a cheap, old-school pedometer.
Regardless of the tracking method, you need to first get an idea of your baseline
daily activity levels. If you work an active job, you likely average over 10,000
steps daily. Those with sedentary jobs often fall in the 5,000- to 7,000-step
range, and individuals who work sedentary jobs from home can average as low
as 2,000 to 4,000 steps daily.
   Once you have an idea of your average daily step count, you need to set a
daily step minimum. It is a good idea to set a step minimum slightly above your
current activity but not extremely higher. This makes your starting daily step
minimum doable, increases energy expenditure a bit, and gives you room to
increase NEAT throughout prep as necessary. For example, if you are averaging
6,700 steps daily, a good starting step minimum may be around 8,000 steps per
day.
   You need to find ways to increase your daily activity to hit these numbers.
This could be from things like going for a walk, going to the store, walking a
pet, playing with your kids, cleaning your house, parking further away, taking
the stairs, or any other type of activity throughout the day. However, the goal
will be to get your steps in with lower-intensity activity to keep NEAT high and
not impact your performance in the gym.

Benefits of NEAT
There are a few benefits to tracking NEAT during contest prep. One is that it is a
way to increase energy expenditure to help you maintain ROL. It can also be
done anywhere throughout the day and does not require more time in the gym.
For busy people, this is a huge bonus.
   NEAT is also lower-intensity than formal cardio and should not interfere as
much with performance and recovery in the gym. For example, you likely cannot
do more than one or two high-intensity interval training sessions a week and still
recover for your workouts; however, you can walk a few thousand extra steps
each day with little to no effect on performance in the gym.
   Finally, by tracking steps and increasing activity, you can help offset some
reduction in NEAT that occurs during prep. This does not completely prevent
plateaus, and they will still be a normal part of the dieting process. However,
you limit a major factor leading to weight loss plateaus.


Adjustments to Create an Energy Deficit
As discussed previously, plateaus occur for several reasons (40). When they
occur, you need to adjust to create an energy deficit and continue to reach your
target ROL. One way to create an energy deficit is to reduce calorie intake as
outlined in the previous chapter. However, energy expenditure can also be
altered through addition of cardio and NEAT.
    In general, your goal during contest prep should be to get away with as much
food and as little cardio or other activity as possible while still seeing progress.
For this reason, we would recommend only adding small amounts of cardio at a
time when adjusting. You may also want to hold off on adding extra cardio until
intake is lower to keep performance and recovery in the gym as high as possible.
    In addition, it may be in your best interest to adjust step counts first before
adding in formal cardio sessions because lower-intensity activity (e.g., walking)
is easier to recover from than added cardio. Often, adding 1,000 to 2,000 steps to
your daily step minimum can be a powerful tool along with a reduction in intake
to create an energy deficit and increase ROL.
    However, we would caution adding extreme amounts of steps or cardio just to
be able to eat more food. Although this may result in an energy deficit and
weight loss, it may interfere with performance and recovery in the gym. In
addition, there is evidence that you get less added value from added activity
when activity levels are already extremely high (24). It is thought that this is due
to a reduction in the involuntary components of NEAT to conserve energy. It
also means that the extra 30 to 60 minutes of weekly cardio time or 1,000 to
2,000 additional steps may not have as much benefit when activity levels are
extremely high as they would when activity is at a more reasonable level.
    In the end, cardio and daily step counts are tools that can be used to create an
energy deficit. However, like any tool, they need to be used appropriately for the
best results. Add cardio and steps as necessary, but do not abuse these tools to
eat significantly more food. You may end up impairing your recovery and losing
strength and, ultimately, muscle mass during contest prep.


RESISTANCE TRAINING
Although resistance training does not expend as many calories as cardio, lifting
weights should be the focus of a competitor’s time in the gym. It provides a
stimulus for muscle maintenance during contest prep. One common mistake
competitors make is backing off their efforts in the gym during contest prep;
however, this is a recipe for muscle loss. Therefore, it is important to understand
the variables to consider when programming training and how to construct an
effective resistance training program during contest prep.


Program Design Variables
Each factor in a resistance training program has a specific effect on the body and
the results you get from your program. The overarching goal is to force your
body to handle more work over time, a strategy called progressive overload.
Adding more work continues to provide a new and greater stimulus that the body
must then adapt to. Progressive overload should remain the primary focus of a
resistance training program during contest prep. Progression can be achieved in
several ways, such as increasing weight used, reps performed, volume lifted, or
proximity to failure, or even by performing the same weight, sets, and reps on a
movement with better technique. However, the key is that you are aiming for
progression over time in some aspect of your workouts.
   For most people, gaining strength while stage-lean is not possible. In fact,
most competitors (especially those who are drug-free) lose strength during
contest prep (26). However, the goal in the gym should be to lift as heavy as
possible while maintaining proper technique and aiming to progress where you
are able.
   The following sections describe each program design variable that, when
combined, result in a well-rounded and effective resistance training program.

Exercise Selection
The first consideration when constructing a training plan is to determine which
exercises you are going to do. This is likely going to differ from person to
person. However, you have a physique-based goal, so there is no exercise that
you must do as long as you are training each muscle group. The barbell back
squat, barbell deadlift, and barbell bench press are great movements; if you have
an injury that keeps you from being able to do any of these movements pain-
free, though, you do not have to incorporate them to make progress. However, it
would be in your best interest to verify that your pain or injury is not caused by a
technique flaw before excluding the exercise completely.
   Assuming that form is not the issue, you can always find a similar alternative
for movements that cause pain. Does your back hurt when you do a barbell back
squat? That is OK because you may do things like single-leg dumbbell-loaded
squatting and lunging movements, leg press, hack squat, leg extensions, hip
thrust, hamstring curls, and many other lower body movements without pain.
You may even be able to still squat with lighter weight and higher reps. But if an
exercise causes pain, do not do it.
   In addition, you should perform exercises for which you are able to use good
form throughout a full range of motion. This increases muscle recruitment and
strength and, ultimately, reduces injury risk (19, 38). Ensure that you can do a
movement through a full range of motion with good technique before doing
heavy loads.
   You also want to incorporate a variety of movements to target a given muscle
group from different angles. In fact, a study found that a workout that
incorporated squats, leg presses, and lunges resulted in more balanced muscle
growth than the same number of working sets from squats alone (8). For
complete development, focus on several different movements per muscle group.
   One final factor in your exercise selection is the principle of specificity. This
means that you must train specific to your goals. If your goal is to improve
development in certain muscle groups, then your exercises should target those
areas to the greatest degree. For example, while a barbell bent-over row taxes the
rear delts, it is not the primary muscle group being trained in that exercise. If you
wish to specifically focus on the rear delts, you need to perform exercises where
that muscle group is the primary area of focus, such as a bent-over lateral raise
or a reverse pec dec fly. When choosing your exercises, make sure to always
keep your goals in mind, and then train specific to those goals.


 FAQ: What is the mind-muscle connection I have heard
 about?
 Referring to the mind-muscle connection in bodybuilding can quickly sound
 like you are advocating some sort of voodoo magic if you are not careful.
 However, this is an old-school idea finally getting some new-school science
 behind it. The idea behind the mind-muscle connection is that you should be
 able to “feel” the muscle working when you train it. It is not enough to
 mindlessly move a weight from point A to point B and back again. You
 should focus on feeling the target muscle working and flexing it as you work
 it. This is called training with intent.
     While the mind-muscle connection has largely just been an anecdotal
 observation throughout the decades, there is some new research showing that
 lifting with intent indeed increases muscular growth (35). It turns out the old-
 school bodybuilders had this one right all along! Properly tapping into the
 mind-muscle connection can come down to several variables. Exercise
 selection is indeed important. You should do movements that you feel instead
 of movements that do not provide that sensation or cause that awareness. You
 should always aim to improve your technique to feel the target muscle group
 to a greater degree. Another factor is to flex the muscle against the weight as
 you lift and to think about that muscle as you train it. Overall, a good rule of
 thumb is that if you do not feel a muscle when you are training it, you likely
 are not activating it optimally.

Frequency
Once you have an idea of the exercises you will perform in the gym, the next
variable to consider is how frequently you are going to do them or train a
specific muscle group. It is common in the bodybuilding world to train each
muscle group once a week; however, this is not the only way to structure
workouts.
   The scientific literature shows muscle protein synthesis rates are elevated 36
to 48 hours (at most) following a workout in trained individuals (23). This means
that the rate at which your body is repairing and growing muscle tissue increases
for a 36- to 48-hour period after you train each muscle group. Based on these
results, it may be beneficial to train muscle groups more than once a week to
keep protein synthesis rates elevated for a greater period. Indeed, studies have
found that training each muscle group at least twice weekly is superior for
muscle growth, even when weekly training volume is matched (31).
    However, before you use these results to justify training your whole body
every day, there are some other considerations. Researchers in this study were
not able to identify additional benefit of training muscle groups more than two
times weekly. There is evidence that tendon turnover is a longer process than
muscle tissue turnover. Whereas protein synthesis levels in muscles return to
baseline in 36 to 48 hours, elevated tendon protein synthesis levels have been
observed 72 hours after exercise (21). This means tendons take longer to recover
from resistance training than muscle tissue does. Therefore, extremely high
training frequencies may increase risk of overuse injury. As a result, training
frequencies of two or three times weekly are recommended for trained
individuals (41).
    When increasing training frequency, keep weekly training volume the same.
For example, if you normally do 10 sets of chest exercises once weekly, begin
by doing 5 sets of chest exercises twice weekly rather than doing 10 sets of chest
exercises twice weekly. Doubling weekly training volume is likely unnecessary
and increases injury risk. Therefore, it will be in your best interest to increase
training frequency while keeping the amount of work you are doing for the week
constant.

 FAQ: How many days a week should I be in the gym?
 There is no magical number of days per week you need to be in the gym. Base
 the number of workouts you are doing weekly on what is necessary to achieve
 your desired training volume and cardio. Also, make sure that you are basing
 your weekly schedule on your recovery ability in the gym and personal
 schedule outside the gym. Contest prep should not be an excuse to ignore
 everything else going on in your real life.

Volume
Volume is the number of sets or the product of the number of sets, reps, and
weight someone performs or lifts for a given exercise or workout. In the
bodybuilding world, there are a number of theories in terms of the most optimal
volume for muscle growth, ranging from workouts with one working set per
muscle group to those where people may be in the gym for three or four hours to
absolutely crush themselves.
   An analysis of studies examining training volume and muscle growth
concluded that multiple-set workouts are superior to single-set workouts for
muscle growth (15). This means the old-school high-intensity training protocol
of one set to failure is not optimal for muscle growth. In addition, an analysis
found that doing 10 or more sets weekly per muscle group was superior for
muscle growth to doing fewer than 10 working sets weekly (30).
   Although this makes a strong case that doing more is always better, more
volume is only better to a point. As you continue to add volume, you will see
less benefit from the added training volume. If you push training volume far
enough, you may not achieve any additional benefit for the extra volume.
Moreover, if volume is taken even further to the point you are not able to
recover, you may observe less progress or, even worse, get injured as a result.
Therefore, more is only better as long as you are still able to recover.
   There is also some evidence of this in the scientific literature (1). A study
comparing 5 and 10 sets per exercise found that over the course of six weeks,
participants in the 5-set group made greater increases in many measures of
muscle size and strength. This is likely due to the 10 sets per exercise protocol
pushing participants beyond their recovery capacities.
   You should adjust training volume based on your individual recovery ability,
keeping in mind that recovery may be reduced deep in prep when intake is
lower, cardio is higher, and body fat is low. Pay attention to how you are feeling,
recovering, and progressing in the gym when assessing your training volume.

Exercise Order
Once you have a list of movements you want to do on a given day and know
how much volume you are aiming for, you need to determine the order that you
perform those exercises. You can perform more volume with exercises earlier in
the workout (37). Therefore, along with increasing frequency and volume for
weaknesses, you may want to arrange exercises within a workout to target
weaknesses first when you are fresh and can achieve the most volume.

Repetition Range
It is typically thought that the 1 to 5 repetition range is the best for strength, 6 to
12 or 8 to 15 is best for hypertrophy, and more than 15 is best for endurance. As
a result, many bodybuilders train exclusively in the 6 to 12 or 8 to 15 repetition
range.
   However, muscle growth can be achieved across a wide array of repetition
ranges. In fact, several studies have observed that when volume load (sets × reps
× weight) is matched, repetition ranges of 6 or fewer reps result in similar
hypertrophy to sets of 8 to 12 (4, 14, 34). Moreover, sets taken to failure in the
25- to 35-rep range result in similar hypertrophy to the 8- to 12-rep range (22,
32). Additionally, more growth may be achieved when training with a variety of
repetition ranges (8, 29).
   Therefore, it will be in your best interest to focus on progression over a
variety of repetition ranges for optimal muscle growth. This can be done in
several ways, such as training muscle groups in a lower-repetition range early in
the week and a higher-repetition range later in the week or training movements
earlier in your workout in lower-repetition ranges with movements later in the
workout in higher-repetition ranges.

Rest Period Length
It is common to see hypertrophy-based workouts include short rest periods of 30
to 60 seconds, likely because shorter rest periods between sets result in a greater
acute increase in hormones such as growth hormone. However, there is no
evidence that acute physiological changes in hormones occurring during a
workout correlate with muscle growth (42). Planning workouts to maximize
acute hormone change will not influence muscle growth.
    Additionally, a review on rest periods and muscle hypertrophy concluded that
rest periods have no effect on muscle hypertrophy if training volume is matched
(11). A study observed less growth with one-minute rest periods compared with
three-minute rest periods (33). This likely occurred because greater training
volume can be achieved with longer rest periods. For example, someone
performing three sets of 10 reps on barbell back squat resting as necessary may
only be able to achieve 10, 7, and 5 reps on the three sets, respectively, if rest
was reduced to one minute. A total of 22 reps in the short rest condition
compared to 30 reps in the longer rest condition means the longer rest condition
would result in more training volume and growth.
    Although there may be a time and place for shorter rest periods in a training
program, in general, it is best to take the amount of time you need between sets
to recover and have a quality performance on your next set. This keeps you
injury-free and progressing.
 FAQ: Do I need to train to failure? If so, should I do it
 in every workout?
 It is common for physique athletes to train to failure. While training to failure
 increases muscle recruitment, it also increases injury risk, is more difficult to
 recover from, and is not required for muscle growth (43). An analysis
 examining the relationship between training to failure and muscle growth
 found no difference between the failure and subfailure conditions. In fact, the
 existing literature suggests that there may be slightly more growth in the
 subfailure condition as opposed to training to failure (6).
     This does not mean that training to failure is useless. It is a tool, and like
 any tool, it may be useful in the appropriate situation. When training to
 failure, be smart about picking when and how often this tool is implemented.
 It may be best to incorporate training to absolute failure primarily on isolation
 exercises (e.g., leg extension) rather than on full-body compound movements
 (e.g., squat) to prevent injury risk and help recovery.

Repetition Tempo
Very slow training was popular in the 1980s and 1990s. Today, some
bodybuilders still do it. However, aside from uses in tendon rehabilitation (16),
the data on extremely slow eccentric training for bodybuilders is not strong.
Super slow training has been shown to result in less muscle activation (7),
metabolic stress (7), training volume (10), strength gain (12), and muscle growth
(36) than a traditional repetition tempo of approximately one to three seconds for
the eccentric part of the movement.
    Much like training to failure, slow eccentrics are a tool that may be beneficial
in certain situations; however, it is not ideal to always use extremely slow
repetition tempos. This does not mean your form should be sloppy. In fact, there
is evidence that proper form can increase muscle activation (38). Poor form and
sloppy reps increase your injury risk. When you are lifting weights, you should
control the weights throughout the entire range of motion, but there is no need to
do very slow reps on everything.

Workout Length
Many people cap workouts at a certain point due to a fear of “going catabolic.”
However, there is no evidence this occurs. In fact, a study looking at the
correlation between changes in hormones during a workout and muscle growth
observed a slight positive correlation between cortisol increase and muscle
growth (42). This likely occurred because hard training acutely increases muscle
growth and cortisol—not necessarily because increased cortisol was causing
muscle growth. However, the take-home point from this study is that you can
take as long as you need to get your training volume in. There is no need to cap
workout length, but it is important to keep training volumes within your
recovery ability.

Program Design Summary
A good starting point when designing a training program is to target each muscle
group with at least 10 sets weekly. Ensure your volume is an amount that you
can recover from and emphasize more volume toward weaker muscle groups and
less toward strengths. Organize your volume per muscle group into two or three
sessions weekly. Train with a variety of repetition ranges, implementing tools
such as failure, short rest periods, slower reps, and other intensity techniques in
an organized manner if you decide to include them in your plan.


Other Considerations
The previous recommendations provide a general evidence-based framework for
constructing a resistance training plan; however, you need to consider several
other practical variables to make the most out of your training program.

Enjoyment
This is an often-overlooked factor when designing a training program. If you are
trying to do what is in theory the “best” program for you but do not enjoy it, the
odds are you are not going to work as hard or stay as consistent. Therefore, you
may not reach your goals. However, if you implement some things you enjoy
doing (within reason), along with what should help to make the most progress,
you may enjoy the program more and work harder.

Flexibility
Bodybuilders can vary greatly in the amount of structure they prefer in their
workouts. Do you like to have every detail (sets, reps, weight, rest period,
tempo, etc.) programmed out for you, or does the thought of that make you
absolutely dread heading to the gym?
   Those who enjoy every detail programmed out should do that. Those who
prefer having a bit more flexibility may find a good middle ground if they have a
programmed progression for their main exercises with a few exercise options or
a volume total for their assistance work.
   Ultimately, if you look at your plan and dread going into the gym to do it, you
are not going to work as hard. Give yourself the flexibility you need in your
program to stay sane yet be sure to still have enough structure so that you
progress over time.

Life Stressors
At times, people attempt workouts far beyond what their schedules or recovery
abilities allow. This can lead to reduced consistency, fewer gains, and, worst
case, an injury.
    Is your job a physical one? If so, you may want to consider training with less
volume so that you are able to recover.
    Are you under a lot of stress and not getting enough sleep? If so, you may
want to consider training with less volume because high stress levels can impair
recovery from workouts and reduce progress over time (2, 39).
    Are you only able to realistically be in the gym three days per week? You can
still make great progress if you do not set up a five-day split for yourself.
    As you are setting up your plan, be sure you also consider your real-life
schedule and other stressors in your life so you recover and progress toward your
goals.


MONITOR THE NEED FOR
RECOVERY
As discussed, during contest prep, when a competitor is in a caloric deficit, his
or her recovery ability is not as high as what it is in the off-season, especially if
cardio is higher and body fat is low. Therefore, be aware of symptoms that
indicate an overreached state and make necessary adjustments to the training
program, such as deloading.
Address Overreaching
Bodybuilders train hard; however, at some point, you will exceed your recovery
ability as fatigue from training begins to accumulate. You may notice that you
do not have quite as much motivation in the gym, little injuries start to pop up,
you do not sleep as well, strength is not increasing like it had been, or you
simply do not feel recovered in the gym. This is overreaching and may have a
benefit in the context of a properly designed program.
   Respond to overreaching when it occurs rather than pushing through to the
point where you have a major injury or become overtrained. Recovering from an
overtrained state takes far longer than recovering from overreaching, so monitor
your performance in the gym and need for recovery to address overreaching
when it occurs (9).


Deload
The easiest way to address overreaching is to perform a deload week. During
this time, training volume or intensity (or both) is reduced. If you feel run-down,
it may not be a bad idea to take a few extra days off from the gym during your
deload week as well; you will tend to recover faster when skipping the gym
completely rather than doing light workouts.
    However, do not lower your caloric intake during this week, even though
training volume is lower. Lowering energy intake during a deload week may
negatively affect your ability to recover.
    Back off in the gym when necessary rather than trying to push through.
Contest prep will be difficult—there is no reason to make it more difficult than it
needs to be and sacrifice results to be more hard-core than your competition.


SAMPLE TRAINING PROGRAMS
In this chapter, we discussed many variables to consider when designing a
training program. There are an infinite number of ways to organize these
variables into an effective training plan. We have included three examples of
ways to organize your training. However, much like with the sample meals plans
in the previous chapter, the best program for you will depend on the factors
covered earlier in this chapter.
Power Block Periodization Program
Power block periodization is a hybrid between traditional powerlifting-style
workouts with heavy weights on squat, bench, and deadlift (powerlifting days)
and traditional bodybuilding-style workouts with higher reps (block training
days). It is a five-day-a-week program with a full-body lower-repetition power
day to begin the week and four workouts later in the week with a higher split by
muscle group (table 7.1).
   Specific exercises to perform each day can be found in table 7.2. In this
example, there is a relatively even focus among all muscle groups; however, this
workout could easily be modified based on your weaknesses and can easily be
adjusted in the assistance exercises performed on the powerlifting day. Another
option is to perform extra sets for weaknesses and fewer sets for strengths on
block training days.

Powerlifting Days
When starting this plan, know your 1 repetition max (1RM) or at least an
estimated 1RM for your squat, bench press, and deadlift. Once you determine
these numbers, subtract 20 to 25 pounds (9-11 kg) from your 1RM and use that
as your starting max for the program. This allows you to build momentum for
several weeks. For example, if you can squat 300 pounds (136 kg), then your
1RM to start this plan will be 275 pounds (125 kg).




Table 7.2 Sample Power Block Periodization Program
POWERLIFTING
DAY                                     BLOCK TRAINING DAYS
Squat:                Legs, shoulders       Back, traps,      Chest, triceps, abs
2 × 5 @ 70%                                 biceps
2 × 3 @ 80%           Hack squat: 4 sets    T-bar row: 4      Incline DB bench press: 3
1 × 1 @ 90%           Leg press: 2 sets     sets              sets
Bench:                Leg extension: 4 sets Pull-up: 5 sets   Machine bench press: 4
2 × 5 @ 70%             Hamstring curl: 3        Cable row: 4       sets
2 × 3 @ 80%             sets                     sets               Cable fly: 4 sets
1 × 1 @ 90%             Walking lunge: 2         Deadlift: 2 sets   Cable pressdown: 4 sets
Deadlift:               sets                     DB shrug: 3        Overhead triceps
2 × 5 @ 70%             Calf raise: 4 sets       sets               extension: 4 sets
2 × 3 @ 80%             DB overhead press:       DB curl: 4 sets    Abs: 3 sets
1 × 1 @ 90%             3 sets                   Preacher curl:
As many as possible     Side lateral raise: 3    2 sets
@ 90%:                  sets                     Hammer curl:
DB bench press: 2-3 ×   DB rear lateral raise:   2 sets
4-6                     3 sets
Cable row: 2-3 × 4-6
Hamstring curl: 2-3 ×
4-6
Calf raise: 2-3 × 4-6

   On your last set of squat, bench, and deadlift, attempt to complete as many
reps as possible while not hitting failure. If you can complete 3 reps or more on
your last set, the following week, add five pounds (2 kg) to your 1RM and
recalculate your numbers. If you fail to complete 3 reps on your last set, use the
same numbers for the following week. If you fail to accomplish 3 reps on your
last set for two consecutive weeks, lower your 1RM by 20 pounds (9 kg) and
recalculate the following week. This is a continuous cycle.

Block Training Days
For the block training days, adjust the repetition ranges every three weeks as
follows:
   ▶   Weeks 1-3: 5-7 reps
   ▶   Weeks 4-6: 8-10 reps
   ▶   Weeks 7-9: 10-15 reps
   ▶   Weeks 10-12: 15-30 reps
We also recommend deloading on week 13 after completing 12 weeks of this
program. Also, if you feel run-down at any point in this program, be sure you are
taking a deload week early.


Blood Volume Maximum Overload Program
This plan is more like what most would think of when they think of a
“bodybuilding” training program. It incorporates higher reps and pump work but
also has some heavier loads included. Six workouts (table 7.3) will be rotated in
a three on, one off, two on, one off pattern so you do not train the same muscle
group on the same day each week.

Blood Volume Workouts
The goal of blood volume training is to force as much blood into the muscle as
possible. This is done by high reps, supersets, and constant tension on the
muscle. During blood volume workouts, perform the reps slowly. It should take
you a full three seconds to lift the weight and a full three seconds to lower the
weight. At the contracted position, you should squeeze the muscle very hard.
Rest no longer than 10 seconds between exercises within a superset and 1 to 1.5
minutes between supersets. If you cannot perform the prescribed number of reps,
lower the weight. This type of training should be extremely painful. If it is not,
increase the weight or slow down the repetition.

Overload Workouts
The primary goal of overload workouts is to get stronger and break personal
records. Every working set should be taken to within one or two reps of failure.
For the first two weeks of this program, do not go to failure. On week three, take
one set for each body part to failure, and on week four, take the last set of every
exercise to failure. When choosing your weight, pick one with which you can
perform at least four reps but no more than seven reps. Once you can perform
seven reps with a given weight, increase the weight on the following workout.
Rest periods should be two to four minutes in length.


Bikini Division Training Program
The prior sample workouts focused evenly on all muscle groups. However, as
mentioned, some divisions place greater emphasis on certain muscle groups. For
example, the bikini division places a large emphasis on the lower body, glutes,
back, and shoulders. The sample program provided in tables 7.4 to 7.6 is one
example of how to organize training that focuses on those specific muscle
groups. A similar approach of emphasizing weaknesses and deemphasizing
strengths can be used for competitors who are working to strengthen weak
muscle groups.
    The sample bikini training program alternates between low-repetition (4-8),
moderate-repetition (6-15), and high-repetition (15-30) workouts. It is also
organized in three, three-week waves. Volume increases over the course of each
three-week wave, and the repetition ranges decrease every three weeks (with a
corresponding increase in the loads lifted). After completing the nine weeks of
training, we recommend deloading in week 10.

Table 7.3 Sample Blood Volume Maximum Overload Training Program
Workout 1
Back and traps         Deadlift 3 × 4-7
(Overload)
                       Pull-up 3 × 4-7
                       Lat pulldown 3 × 4-7
                       T-Bar row 3 × 4-7
                       Low machine row 3 × 4-7
                       Barbell shrug 2 × 4-7
Delts (blood volume)   DB lateral raise 4 × 14-20 superset with DB overhead press 4 ×
                       14-20
                       Rear delt machine fly 3 × 14-20 superset with upright row 3 × 14-
                       20
Workout 2
Legs (blood volume)    Leg extension 4 × 14-20 superset with leg press 4 × 14-20
                       Hamstring curl 4 × 14-20 superset with hack squat 4 × 14-20
                       Barbell hip thrust 2 × 14-20
                       DB calf raise 2 × 14-20 superset with toe press 2 × 14-20
Abdominals (blood      Sit-up 3 × 14-20
volume)
                       Cable crunch 3 × 14-20
Workout 3
Chest (overload)       Bench press 3 × 4-7
                       Decline bench 3 × 4-7
                         DB incline press 3 × 4-7
                         Pec dec machine 3 × 4-7
Biceps (blood volume)    Hammer curl 3 × 14-20 superset with barbell curl 3 × 14-20
                         Wide DB curl 3 × 14-20 superset with cable curl 3 × 14-20
Triceps (blood volume)   V-bar cable pushdown 3 × 14-20 superset with DB skullcrusher 3
                         × 14-20
                         2-arm DB kickback 3 × 14-20 superset with machine triceps
                         extension 3 × 14-20
Workout 4
Delts (overload)         DB military press 3 × 4-7
                         DB lateral raise 3 × 4-7
                         Reverse pec dec 3 × 4-7
                         Barbell upright row 3 × 4-7
Back and traps (blood    Neutral grip cable row 4 × 14-20 superset with standing DB row
volume)                  4 × 14-20
                         Machine row 4 × 14-20 superset with neutral grip lat pulldown 4
                         × 14-20
                         DB shrug 1 × 14-20 superset with straight-bar cable shrug 1 × 14-
                         20
Workout 5
Legs (overload)          Squat 3 × 4-7
                         Leg extension 3 × 4-7
                         DB leg curl 3 × 4-7
                         Stiff-leg deadlift 3 × 4-7
                         DB walking lunge 1 × 7-10 (each leg)
                         Hip abduction 2 × 10
                         Hip adduction 2 × 10
                         Calf raise 2 × 10
Abdominals (overload)    Weighted sit-up 3 × 4-7
                         Machine crunch 3 × 4-7
Workout 6
Chest (blood volume)         DB fly 4 × 14-20 superset with DB bench press 4 × 14-20
                             Pec dec 4 × 14-20 superset with hammer incline press 4 × 14-20
Biceps (overload)            Barbell curl 3 × 4-7
                             Hammer curl 3 × 4-7
                             Machine preacher curl 3 × 4-7
Triceps (overload)           Straight-bar cable pressdown 3 × 4-7
                             Skullcrusher 3 × 4-7
                             DB overhead extension 3 × 4-7



Table 7.4 Sample Bikini Training Program: Weeks 1-3
                EXERCISE                            WEEK 1        WEEK 2        WEEK 3
Day 1
Back (L)        Deadlift                            3×6           4×6           5×6
                Pendlay row                         3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8       5 × 6-8
                Pull-up                             2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
                DB row                              2 × 6-10      3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10
Glutes (M)      DB lunge                            3-4 × 8-      3-4 × 8-      3-4 × 8-
                                                    12/leg        12/leg        12/leg
                Hip thrust                          2-4 × 10-12   2-4 × 10-12   2-4 × 10-12
                Weighted back extension             2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15
Abs             Cable crunch                        2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15
Day 2
Chest (M)       DB bench                            2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12
Shoulders       DB overhead press                   2-4 × 10-12   2-4 × 10-12   2-4 × 10-12
(M)
                Seated side lateral raise           2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15
Arms (M)        Dip                                 2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12
                Standing EZ-bar curl          2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12
                Overhead cable extension      2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15
                Rope cable curl               2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15
Day 3
Lower body      Squat                         3×6           4×6           5×6
(L)
                RDL                           3×6           4×6           5×6
                Leg extension                 2 × 6-10      3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10
                Hamstring curl                2 × 6-10      3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10
Glutes (H)      Step back DB lunge            2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
                Cable pull-through            2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25
                Banded hip thrust             2-4 × 20-30   2-4 × 20-30   2-4 × 20-30
Abs             Lying leg raise               2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15
Day 4
Shoulders (L)   Barbell overhead press        3×6           4×6           5×6
                1-arm standing side lateral   3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10      5 × 6-10
                raise
                Upright row                   2 × 6-10      3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10
                1-arm braced rear raise       2 × 6-10      3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10
Back (H)        Moto row                      2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
                Chest-supported row           2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
                Straight-arm cable            2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
                pressdown
Day 5
Glutes (L)      Hip thrust                    3×6           4×6           5×6
                Bulgarian split squat         3 × 6-8/leg   4 × 6-8/leg   5 × 6-8/leg
                Sumo leg press                2 × 6-10      3 × 6-10      4 × 6-10
Legs (H)        Hack squat                    2-3 × 15-20   2-3 × 15-20   2-3 × 15-20
               Leg extension             2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               Hamstring curl            2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               Calf raise                2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25
Abs            Russian twist             2-4 × 8-      2-4 × 8-      2-4 × 8-
                                         12/side       12/side       12/side
Day 6
Back (M)       Reverse-grip pulldown     3-4 × 8-12    3-4 × 8-12    3-4 × 8-12
               Meadows row               2-4 × 10-12   2-4 × 10-12   2-4 × 10-12
               Wide-grip cable row       2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15   2-3 × 10-15
Glutes (H)     Single-leg hip thrust     3-4 × 15-20   3-4 × 15-20   3-4 × 15-20
               Glute kickback            2-4 × 20-25   2-4 × 20-25   2-4 × 20-25
               Abductor machine          2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
Shoulders (H) Cable side lateral raise   4-6 × 20-30   4-6 × 20-30   4-6 × 20-30
Day 7
Off day


Table 7.5 Sample Bikini Training Program: Weeks 4-6
               EXERCISE                  WEEK 4        WEEK 5        WEEK 6
Day 1
Back (L)       Deadlift                  3×5           4×5           5×5
               Pendlay row               3 × 5-7       4 × 5-7       5 × 5-7
               Pull-up                   2 × 5-7       3 × 5-7       4 × 5-7
               DB row                    2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
Glutes (M)     DB lunge                  3-4 × 6-      3-4 × 6-      3-4 × 6-
                                         10/leg        10/leg        10/leg
               Hip thrust                2-4 × 8-10    2-4 × 8-10    2-4 × 8-10
               Weighted back extension   2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12
Abs            Cable crunch              2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15
Day 2
Chest (M)       DB bench                      2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10
Shoulders       DB overhead press             2-4 × 8-10    2-4 × 8-10    2-4 × 8-10
(M)
                Seated side lateral raise     2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12    2-4 × 8-12
Arms (M)        Dip                           2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10
                Standing EZ-bar curl          2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10
                Overhead cable extension      2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12
                Rope cable curl               2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12
Day 3
Lower body      Squat                         3×5           4×5           5×5
(L)
                RDL                           3×5           4×5           5×5
                Leg extension                 2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
                Hamstring curl                2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
Glutes (H)      Step back DB lunge            2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
                Cable pull-through            2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25
                Banded hip thrust             2-4 × 20-30   2-4 × 20-30   2-4 × 20-30
Abs             Lying leg raise               2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15   2-4 × 10-15
Day 4
Shoulders (L)   Barbell overhead press        3×5           4×5           5×5
                1-arm standing side lateral   3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8       5 × 6-8
                raise
                Upright row                   2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
                1-arm braced rear raise       2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
Back (H)        Moto row                      2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
                Chest-supported row           2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
                Straight-arm cable            2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
                pressdown
Day 5

Glutes (L)     Hip thrust                3×5           4×5           5×5
               Bulgarian split squat     3 × 5-7/leg   4 × 5-7/leg   5 × 5-7/leg
               Sumo leg press            2 × 6-8       3 × 6-8       4 × 6-8
Legs (H)       Hack squat                2-3 × 15-20   2-3 × 15-20   2-3 × 15-20
               Leg extension             2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               Hamstring curl            2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               Calf raise                2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25
Abs            Russian twist             2-4 × 8-      2-4 × 8-      2-4 × 8-
                                         12/side       12/side       12/side
Day 6
Back (M)       Reverse-grip pulldown     3-4 × 6-10    3-4 × 6-10    3-4 × 6-10
               Meadows row               2-4 × 8-10    2-4 × 8-10    2-4 × 8-10
               Wide-grip cable row       2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12    2-3 × 8-12
Glutes (H)     Single-leg hip thrust     3-4 × 15-20   3-4 × 15-20   3-4 × 15-20
               Glute kickback            2-4 × 20-25   2-4 × 20-25   2-4 × 20-25
               Abductor machine          2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
Shoulders (H) Cable side lateral raise   4-6 × 20-30   4-6 × 20-30   4-6 × 20-30
Day 7
Off day


Table 7.6 Sample Bikini Training Program: Weeks 7-9
               EXERCISE                  WEEK 7        WEEK 8        WEEK 9
Day 1
Back (L)       Deadlift                  3×4           4×4           5×4
               Pendlay row               3 × 4-6       4 × 4-6       5 × 4-6
               Pull-up                   2 × 4-6       3 × 4-6       4 × 4-6
               DB row                    2 × 5-8       3 × 5-8       4 × 5-8
Glutes (M)      DB lunge                      3-4 × 6-8/leg   3-4 × 6-8/leg   3-4 × 6-8/leg
                Hip thrust                    2-4 × 6-10      2-4 × 6-10      2-4 × 6-10
                Weighted back extension       2-3 × 8-10      2-3 × 8-10      2-3 × 8-10
Abs             Cable crunch                  2-4 × 10-15     2-4 × 10-15     2-4 × 10-15
Day 2
Chest (M)       DB bench                      2-4 × 6-8       2-4 × 6-8       2-4 × 6-8
Shoulders       DB overhead press             2-4 × 6-10      2-4 × 6-10      2-4 × 6-10
(M)
                Seated side lateral raise     2-4 × 8-10      2-4 × 8-10      2-4 × 8-10
Arms (M)        Dip                           2-4 × 6-8       2-4 × 6-8       2-4 × 6-8
                Standing EZ-bar curl          2-4 × 6-8       2-4 × 6-8       2-4 × 6-8
                Overhead cable extension      2-3 × 8-10      2-3 × 8-10      2-3 × 8-10
                Rope cable curl               2-3 × 8-10      2-3 × 8-10      2-3 × 8-10
Day 3
Lower body      Squat                         3×4             4×4             5×4
(L)
                RDL                           3×4             4×4             5×4
                Leg extension                 2 × 5-8         3 × 5-8         4 × 5-8
                Hamstring curl                2 × 5-8         3 × 5-8         4 × 5-8
Glutes (H)      Step back DB lunge            2-4 × 15-20     2-4 × 15-20     2-4 × 15-20
                Cable pull-through            2-4 × 15-25     2-4 × 15-25     2-4 × 15-25
                Banded hip thrust             2-4 × 20-30     2-4 × 20-30     2-4 × 20-30
Abs             Lying leg raise               2-4 × 10-15     2-4 × 10-15     2-4 × 10-15
Day 4
Shoulders (L)   Barbell overhead press        3×4             4×4             5×4
                1-arm standing side lateral   3 × 5-8         4 × 5-8         5 × 5-8
                raise
                Upright row                   2 × 5-8         3 × 5-8         4 × 5-8
               1-arm braced rear raise   2 × 5-8       3 × 5-8       4 × 5-8
Back (H)       Moto row                  2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
               Chest-supported row       2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20   2-4 × 15-20
               Straight-arm cable        2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               pressdown
Day 5
Glutes (L)     Hip thrust                3×4           4×4           5×4
               Bulgarian split squat     3 × 4-6/leg   4 × 4-7/leg   5 × 4-7/leg
               Sumo leg press            2 × 5-8       3 × 5-8       4 × 5-8
Legs (H)       Hack squat                2-3 × 15-20   2-3 × 15-20   2-3 × 15-20
               Leg extension             2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               Hamstring curl            2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
               Calf raise                2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25   2-4 × 15-25
Abs            Russian twist             2-4 × 8-      2-4 × 8-      2-4 × 8-
                                         12/side       12/side       12/side
Day 6
Back (M)       Reverse-grip pulldown     3-4 × 6-8     3-4 × 6-8     3-4 × 6-8
               Meadows row               2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10    2-4 × 6-10
               Wide-grip cable row       2-3 × 8-10    2-3 × 8-10    2-3 × 8-10
Glutes (H)     Single-leg hip thrust     3-4 × 15-20   3-4 × 15-20   3-4 × 15-20
               Glute kickback            2-4 × 20-25   2-4 × 20-25   2-4 × 20-25
               Abductor machine          2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30   2-3 × 20-30
Shoulders (H) Cable side lateral raise   4-6 × 20-30   4-6 × 20-30   4-6 × 20-30
Day 7
Off day


Take-Home Points
   ▶ Increasing exercise and nonexercise activity can create an energy deficit.
 However, try to perform as little formal cardio as possible while still
 achieving your target rate of weight loss. Base the intensity of cardio on
 your recovery ability and preexisting injury history.
▶ Tracking step counts during contest prep can keep you active during daily
 life and help prevent a decline in energy expenditure outside the gym.
▶ Maintaining training intensity through contest prep is key for muscle
 preservation. Continue to focus on progressive overload throughout
 contest prep.
▶ Increasing training volume results in increased muscle growth if you do
 not exceed your recovery ability. Allocating this volume into two or three
 workouts weekly may result in more progress than training body parts
 once weekly.
▶ There is no “best” repetition range for muscle growth. Training
 throughout a variety of repetition ranges may be superior for muscle
 growth than consistently performing the same number of reps.
▶ Take deload weeks and extra days off from the gym as necessary for
 recovery. There is no award for pushing through when you are feeling beat
 down. If anything, you will slow progression and increase injury risk.
▶ You should do a workout you enjoy in the gym as long as it is reasonable
 for your goals. If you enjoy what you are doing, you are likely to work
 harder, stay more consistent, and see more progress.
                                                                                 8
The Art of Posing



Bodybuilding has long been viewed as a combination of art and science. Posing
is more the artistic side of the sport. Beginners and advanced competitors alike
often misunderstand it. When most competitors think of posing, they quickly get
the image of squeezing and flexing as hard as they can onstage to show
muscularity and conditioning. While this is indeed part of posing, the main
component of effective posing is displaying your body effectively. The judges
can only judge what they can see. You can win or lose a show depending on how
you display your physique. Years of training and months of dieting may all be
for nothing if you do not display your physique to its fullest potential.
   Attend any bodybuilding show, and you will quickly see who did his or her
homework when it comes to posing. When competitors walk out onstage, it is
not uncommon for some of them to look impressive while others look average.
As they begin to pose, some competitors’ physiques will practically pop off the
stage, and others seem to fade. This is almost always due to effective posing
execution.
   In this section, we will cover all the dos and don’ts of effective posing as well
as the way to efficiently practice and prepare for posing come show day.


Pose Finder
DIVISION AND POSE NAME                                    PAGE NUMBER
Bodybuilding (men and women)
Front standing relaxed                                    96
Side standing relaxed                        98
Rear standing relaxed                        100
Front double biceps                          102
Front lat spread                             104
Side chest                                   106
Side triceps                                 108
Back (or rear) double biceps                 110
Back (or rear) lat spread                    112
Hands overhead abdominal (or ab and thigh)   114
Hands on hips most muscular                  116
Crab most muscular                           118
Hands clasped most muscular                  120
Classic physique (men)
Front standing relaxed                       122
Side standing relaxed                        124
Rear standing relaxed                        126
Front double biceps                          128
Side chest                                   130
Back (or rear) double biceps                 132
Hands overhead abdominal (or ab and thigh)   134
Favorite classic pose                        136
Men’s physique
Front pose                                   138
Side pose                                    140
Back pose                                    142
Women’s physique
Front standing relaxed                       144
Side standing relaxed                                   146
Rear standing relaxed                                   148
Front double biceps                                     150
Side chest with leg extended                            152
Side triceps with leg extended                          154
Back (or rear) double biceps                            156
Hands overhead abdominal (or ab and thigh)              158
Figure (women)
Front pose                                              160
Side pose                                               162
Back pose                                               164
Bikini (women)
Front pose                                              166
Back pose                                               168



BODYBUILDING (MEN AND
WOMEN)
Men and women who compete in the bodybuilding division have two rounds of
judging: the standing relaxed poses and the mandatory poses.


Round 1: Standing Relaxed Poses
At prejudging, you will be judged first on the standing relaxed poses. Do not let
the name deceive you; there is nothing relaxing about them! Back when
bodybuilding first started, the judges indeed wanted to view the competitors in a
relaxed pose. Inevitably, some competitors would try to flex a bit to give
themselves an advantage. Over the years, judges allowed more flexing in the
standing relaxed round, and today they expect it.
   ▶ Front standing relaxed • Side standing relaxed • Rear standing relaxed
Round 2: Mandatory Poses
After the standing relaxed poses, the judges will have you face the front once
again. This is when they prepare for the mandatory poses and call out specific
poses. You and the other competitors execute the poses until the judge says to
relax. Then go into your relaxed pose from the first round. At no point on stage
should you ever actually relax and not pose.
   ▶ Front double biceps • Front lat spread • Side chest • Side triceps • Back
    (or rear) double biceps • Back (or rear) lat spread • Hands overhead
    abdominal (or ab and thigh)

Most Muscular
The final pose is the most muscular pose. A most muscular pose can be
performed multiple ways, and we will touch on each one.
   ▶ Hands on hips most muscular • Crab most muscular • Hands clasped most
    muscular


CLASSIC PHYSIQUE (MEN)
Men who compete in the classic physique division have two rounds of judging,
like the men’s and women’s bodybuilding divisions.


Round 1: Standing Relaxed Poses
At prejudging, you will be judged first on the standing relaxed poses. Do not let
the name deceive you; there is nothing relaxing about them! Back when
bodybuilding first started, the judges indeed wanted to view the competitors in a
relaxed pose. Inevitably, some competitors would try to flex a bit to give
themselves an advantage. Over the years, judges allowed more flexing in the
standing relaxed round, and today they expect it.
   ▶ Front standing relaxed • Side standing relaxed • Rear standing relaxed


Round 2: Mandatory Poses
After the standing relaxed poses, the judges will have you face the front once
again. This is when they prepare for the mandatory poses. In this round, they call
out specific poses. You and all other competitors execute the poses until the
judge says to relax. Then go into the relaxed pose again from the first round. At
no point on stage should you ever actually relax and not pose.
   ▶ Front double biceps • Side chest • Back (or rear) double biceps • Hands
    overhead abdominal (or ab and thigh) • Favorite classic pose


MEN’S PHYSIQUE
The men’s physique division has far fewer poses than bodybuilding or classic
physique. As discussed previously, this also means you have fewer ways to beat
your opponents than in bodybuilding or classic physique.


Quarter Turns
In this division, you only have one round of comparison poses, but you will be
put through each pose several times using quarter turns.
   ▶ Front pose • Side pose • Back pose


WOMEN’S PHYSIQUE
Like the men’s classic physique division, the women’s physique division has
two rounds of judging and versions of several poses specific to the division.


Round 1: Standing Relaxed Poses
At prejudging, you will be judged first on the standing relaxed poses. Do not let
the name deceive you; there is nothing relaxing about them! Back when
bodybuilding first started, the judges indeed wanted to view the competitors in a
relaxed pose. Inevitably, some competitors would try to flex a bit to give
themselves an advantage. Over the years, judges allowed more flexing in the
standing relaxed round, and today, they expect it.
   ▶ Front standing relaxed • Side standing relaxed • Rear standing relaxed


Round 2: Mandatory Poses
After the standing relaxed poses, the judges will have you face the front once
again. This is when they prepare for the mandatory poses. In this round, they call
out specific poses. You and all other competitors execute the poses until the
judge says to relax. Then go into the relaxed pose again from the first round. At
no point onstage should you ever actually relax and not pose.
   ▶ Front double biceps • Side chest with leg extended • Side triceps with leg
    extended • Back (or rear) double biceps • Hands overhead abdominal (or
    ab and thigh)


FIGURE (WOMEN)
Much like the men’s physique division, women’s figure has fewer poses than
bodybuilding or women’s physique. In this division, you only have one round of
comparison poses, but you will be put through each pose several times.
   ▶ Front pose • Side pose • Back pose


BIKINI (WOMEN)
Bikini posing is quite different compared to other divisions. The other divisions
have quarter turns, but bikini only uses half turns. While there are fewer poses,
and the poses are seemingly less difficult to execute, the subtlety of bikini posing
should be considered carefully. In this division, being able to pose and make it
look natural as well as effortless counts for a lot. Practice should not be taken
lightly.
   One final note: While divisions can have slightly different criteria for posing
depending on which federation you compete in, bikini probably has the most
variation between competing sanctions. For this reason, check the guidelines for
the specific federation you are competing in.
   ▶ Front pose • Back pose
      Bodybuilding (Men and Women)
         FRONT STANDING RELAXED
When you first walk out on stage with the other competitors, you will be lined up, and you
should immediately execute the front standing relaxed pose. The judges will not call out this
pose because you are expected to go directly into it.




   To properly perform a front standing relaxed pose, face the judges. When executing any
pose, run through a checklist of where your body parts should be from the ground up. As you
face the judges, set your feet just a bit narrower than shoulder width, with your toes slightly
turned outward to enhance quadriceps sweep. Flex your quads by pushing your feet against the
ground, almost as if you were trying push your feet through the floor. Shift your hips back ever
so slightly to cause separation in your upper quads. Next, raise your ribcage as high as you can
and pull your abdominal wall in as far as you can. Imagine trying to touch your navel to your
spine. Flare your lats and keep your arms out at your sides at roughly a 45-degree angle. Keep
your shoulder girdle down, keep your chin up, and aim to have a relaxed facial expression in
all your poses.




            SIDE STANDING RELAXED
After the front standing relaxed pose, the judges will say, “Quarter turn.” Always turn to the
right. Then go directly into the side standing relaxed pose.
   Start the side standing relaxed pose by facing the side of the stage. Your feet should be
touching or almost touching, with the foot closest to the judges about one or two inches
(2.5-5 cm) in front of the other foot. Slightly bend the knee closest to the judges and flex your
glutes. Keeping your rib cage down or in a neutral position, flex your abs, and pull your
abdominal wall in as far as you possibly can. Flex your pecs and turn your shoulders very
slightly to open up to the judges. Use your back arm to slightly push into your back pectoral.
Keep your chin up and your head facing to the side of the stage. Do not look at the judges
during the side standing relaxed pose.
           REAR STANDING RELAXED
After the side standing relaxed, the judges will again say, “Quarter turn to the right.” You
should then face the back of the stage with your back toward the judges and go directly into the
rear standing relaxed pose. Start with your feet just narrower than shoulder width. Turn your
toes slightly out to the sides so that your outer quads are visible from the back. Bend your
knees a little and flex your hamstrings by imagining pressing your heels backward. You should
then squeeze and flex your glutes very tightly. Flare and flex your lats as you bring your arms
to your sides at roughly a 45-degree angle. Lean back ever so slightly and keep your head up.
   After your rear standing relaxed, the judges will once again say, “Quarter turn.” At this
point, you perform your side standing relaxed pose while facing the other direction.
               FRONT DOUBLE BICEPS
The front double biceps pose is often called first in the mandatory posing round. You can set
your feet in one of two ways. You may either keep your feet stationary as they are in the front
standing relaxed pose, or you may bring one leg forward to display the quad. Pull your
ribcage up as you pull in your abdominal wall as far as you can. Raise your arms, with your
elbows just slightly in front of your torso, and flex your biceps. Keep your chin up and your
shoulders down.
                    FRONT LAT SPREAD
The front lat spread should begin with your feet set as they are in your front standing relaxed
pose. Flex your quads, and shift your hips back. Pull your ribcage upward and pull your
abdomen in. Place your hands at your sides just above your hips, with your fists in a
ball. Flare your lats as widely as you can. Keep your chest up, shoulders down, and chin up. A
common mistake in this pose is trying to flex your lats. However, the lats do not need to be
flexed, only flared.
                                 SIDE CHEST
After the front double biceps and front lat spread poses, the judges will ask you to quarter turn
and face the side. The first pose usually called is the side chest pose. In this pose, you spike the
calf closest to the judges by bringing your heel off of the ground and shifting your weight onto
your toes. Then squat down slightly: Your thigh should be about a 35- to
55-degree angle to the floor. Take the knee furthest from the judges and push it slightly into
your other leg. Flex the hamstring and glute closest to the judges. Place your ribcage in a
neutral position while you flex your abs and intercostals and pull your abdomen inward as far
as you can. Clasp your hands in front of you and flex your pecs as you twist your torso ever so
slightly toward the judges. Keep your shoulder down and your chin up.
                             SIDE TRICEPS
The side triceps pose begins with your feet and legs set just as they are in the side chest pose.
However, instead of clasping your hands in front, clasp them behind your back. You can do
this by either locking your fingers together or using your back hand to grab the wrist of your
front hand. Keep your torso in an upright position as you flex your abs and
intercostals while pulling your abdominal wall in as far as you can. Open your body ever so
slightly toward the judges but do not pull your arm behind you. Your goal should be to display
the triceps prominently to the judges. Do not shrug your shoulders; this is a common mistake.
Keep your chin up.
  BACK (OR REAR) DOUBLE BICEPS
After you complete the side mandatory poses, the judges will have you quarter turn toward the
back of the stage. Typically, they will call out rear double biceps pose, sometimes called the
back double biceps pose. Place one foot behind you and spike your calf. Sometimes the judges
specify which calf you should spike. If they do not specify which foot to place behind, then
pick the one you feel most comfortable with. Place your foot behind your other foot
approximately 10 to 15 inches (25-38 cm). Your knees should be turned outward slightly and
bent just a little. Flex both hamstrings by digging your feet against the floor, as if you were
trying to perform a leg curl. Flex and squeeze your glutes tightly. Bring your arms out to your
sides and flex your biceps and the entire muscularity of your back. You should not pinch your
shoulder blades together. Instead, keep them open so that your back stays wide. Lean your
torso back ever so slightly toward the judges.
       BACK (OR REAR) LAT SPREAD
The rear lat spread, sometimes called the back lat spread, begins with the same leg position as
the back double biceps pose. Place one foot behind you and spike the calf. Sometimes the
judges specify which calf you should spike. If they do not specify which foot to place behind,
then pick the one you feel most comfortable with. Place your foot behind your other foot
approximately 10 to 15 inches (25-38 cm). Your knees should be turned outward slightly and
bent just a little. Flex both hamstrings by digging your feet against the floor, as if you were
trying to perform a leg curl. Flex and squeeze your glutes tightly. You should lean back ever so
slightly as you place your hands on your sides just above your hips and hook your thumbs.
Open up your shoulder blades and flare your lats. Keep your chest high. On this pose, you flex
your lats, as opposed to the front lat spread, where you do not need to flex the lats. Keep your
shoulders down and do not shrug because this diminishes the muscularity in your back. Keep
your chin up.
   HANDS OVERHEAD ABDOMINAL
       (OR AB AND THIGH)
After the back poses, the judges may have you perform the side chest and side triceps poses on
the other side. Then they will bring you back around to the front for the hands overhead
abdominal pose. This pose is also sometimes called the ab and thigh pose. Begin this pose by
placing one leg in front of the other and spiking the calf. Sometimes judges specify which leg
they want to see. If they do not specify which leg to place forward, then use the leg you are
most comfortable with. Flex the quads in both legs, but make sure you prominently display the
quads on the forward leg. Raise your hands and place them behind your head. Then flex your
abs as hard as you can while you slightly crunch down to increase the contraction. Keep your
pecs and arms flexed and your arms as close as possible to your head.
 HANDS ON HIPS MOST MUSCULAR
With the hands on hips most muscular, begin by setting your legs just as you would in a front
standing relaxed pose, with your hips back and quads flexed. Keep your ribcage down as you
flex your abs. Bring your hands to your sides and flex your pecs and arms
by pressing into your hips hard. Keep your shoulders down and chin up. This type of most
muscular pose tends to look good on those with great shape or great shoulder development.
              CRAB MOST MUSCULAR
The crab most muscular is the pose that most people think of when they think of a “most
muscular” pose. In this version, you place one leg forward and flex your quad. Inhale as much
air as possible while raising your ribcage and pulling your abs in. Lean over slightly as you
bring
your arms in front of your body and flex your biceps, shoulders, traps, and pecs all at once.
This type of most muscular pose tends to look great on those with good overall muscle size in
the chest, traps, and arms.
               HANDS CLASPED MOST
                   MUSCULAR
The hands clasped most muscular begins with your legs set just as they are in a front standing
relaxed pose. With your ribcage in a neutral position, flex your abs and pull your abdominal
wall in. Bring your hands to the front and clasp them together. Push your hands together to
flex your arms, pecs, and shoulders. Be careful not to pinch your shoulders inward because it
can make you look narrow and smaller. This most muscular pose tends to look good on very
lean competitors because it prominently shows off the conditioning of all parts of the body.
                  Classic Physique (Men)
         FRONT STANDING RELAXED
When you first walk out onstage with the other competitors, you will be lined up, and you
should immediately do the front standing relaxed pose. The judges will not call out this pose
because you are expected to go directly into it.
   To properly perform a front standing relaxed pose, face the judges. When executing any
pose, run through a checklist of where your body parts should be from the ground up. As you
face the judges, set your feet just a bit narrower than shoulder width, with your toes slightly
turned outward to enhance quad sweep. Flex your quads, pushing your feet against the ground,
almost as if you were trying push your feet through the floor. Shift your hips back ever so
slightly so they cause separation in your upper quads. Next, raise your ribcage as high as you
can and pull your abdominal wall in as far as you can. Imagine trying to touch your navel to
your spine. Flare your lats and keep your arms out at your sides at roughly a 45-degree angle.
Keep your shoulder girdle down, keep your chin up, and aim to have a relaxed facial
expression in all your poses.
            SIDE STANDING RELAXED
After the front standing relaxed pose, the judges will say, “Quarter turn.” Always turn to the
right. Then go directly into the side standing relaxed pose.
   Start the side standing relaxed pose by facing the side of the stage. Your feet should be
touching or almost touching, with the foot closest to the judges about one or two inches (2.5-5
cm) in front of the other foot. Slightly bend the knee closest to the judges. Keeping your rib
cage down or in a neutral position, flex your abs and pull your abdominal wall in as far as you
possibly can. Flex your pecs and turn your shoulders very slightly to open up to the judges. Use
your back arm to slightly push into your back pectoral. Keep your chin up and keep your head
facing to the side of the stage. Do not look at the judges while in the side standing relaxed
pose.
           REAR STANDING RELAXED
After the side standing relaxed, the judges will say, “Quarter turn to the right.” You should face
the back of the stage, with your back toward the judges. You will go directly into the rear
standing relaxed pose. Start with your feet just narrower than shoulder width. Turn your toes
slightly out to the sides so that your outer quads are visible from the back. Bend your knees a
little and flex your hamstrings by imagining pressing your heels backward. You should then
squeeze your glutes, but there is no need to do so very tightly because they are not visible in
classic physique. Flare and flex your lats as you bring your arms to your sides at roughly a 45-
degree angle. Lean back ever so slightly and keep your head up.
    After your rear standing relaxed, the judges will once again say, “Quarter turn.” You will
face the other side. At this point, perform your side standing relaxed pose while facing the
other direction.
               FRONT DOUBLE BICEPS
The front double biceps pose is often called first in the mandatory posing round. You can set
your feet in one of two ways. You may either keep your legs stationary as they are in the front
standing relaxed pose, or you may bring one leg forward to display the quad. Pull your ribcage
up as you pull in your abdominal wall as far as you can. Raise your arms up to your sides, with
your elbows just slightly in front of your torso. Flex your biceps with a slightly open fist and
one arm extended a little higher than the other. Keep your chin up and your shoulders down.
                                SIDE CHEST
After the front double biceps pose and front lat spread, the judges will ask you to quarter turn
and face the side. The first pose usually called is the side chest pose. Spike the calf closest to
the judges and squat down slightly. Your thigh should be at about a 35- to 55-degree angle to
the floor. Take the knee furthest from the judges and push it slightly into your other leg. Flex
the hamstring and glute closest to the judges. Place your ribcage in a neutral position while you
flex your abs and intercostals and pull your abdomen inward as far as you can. Clasp your
hands in front of you, and flex your pecs as you twist your torso ever so slightly toward the
judges. Keep your shoulder down and your chin up.
  BACK (OR REAR) DOUBLE BICEPS
After you complete the side mandatory poses, the judges will have you quarter turn toward the
back of the stage. Typically, they call out rear double biceps pose, sometimes called the back
double biceps pose. Place one foot behind you and spike the calf. Sometimes the judges specify
which calf you should spike. If they do not specify which foot to place behind, pick the one
you feel most comfortable with. Place your foot behind your other foot approximately 10 to 15
inches (25-38 cm). Your knees should be turned outward slightly and bent just a little. Flex
both hamstrings by digging your feet against the floor, as if you were trying to perform a leg
curl. Flex and squeeze your glutes tightly. Bring your arms out to your sides and flex your
biceps and the entire muscularity of your back. Keep your fists slightly open as you raise one
arm a little higher than the other. You should not pinch your shoulder blades together. Instead,
keep them open so that your back stays wide. Lean your torso back ever so slightly toward the
judges.
   HANDS OVERHEAD ABDOMINAL
       (OR AB AND THIGH)
After the back poses, the judges may have you perform the side chest and side triceps poses on
the other side. Then they will bring you back around to the front for the hands overhead
abdominal pose. This pose is also sometimes called the ab and thigh pose. Begin by placing
one leg in front of the other and spiking the calf. Sometimes the judge may specify which leg
they want to see. If they do not specify which leg to place forward, use the leg you are most
comfortable with. Flex the quads in both legs, but make sure you prominently display the
quads on the forward leg. Raise your hands and place them behind your head. Then flex your
abs as hard as you can while you slightly crunch down to increase the contraction. Keep your
pecs and arms flexed and your arms as close as possible to your head.
             FAVORITE CLASSIC POSE
The classic physique division is different from the other divisions in that one of the mandatory
poses is self-selected. Competitors are encouraged to be creative with this pose; however, we
recommend choosing a pose that best showcases strengths in your physique. Three potential
options appear here; however, there are many other poses you can hit as your favorite classic
pose. Typically, the only pose that is not allowed as a favorite classic pose is a most muscular.
Check with the sanction for your competition for clarification on what poses cannot be used as
a favorite classic pose.
                            Men’s Physique
                              FRONT POSE
The first pose in men’s physique is the front pose. This pose can be done a few ways. You
should stand with your feet facing the judges and set about shoulder-width apart. Flex and pull
in the abs very tightly because the abs are one of the primary areas of focus in men’s physique.
You should then slightly twist your hips so that you can give the illusion of a smaller waist. Do
not twist too much, or the judges may ask you to face the front. Make sure to flare your lats.
Your hands can then either be out to your sides, or you may have one hand on your hip. Keep
your chin up and your shoulders down. Your smile should look genuine.
                                  SIDE POSE
After you complete the front pose, the judge will ask you to quarter turn to the right. You then
go into the side pose. With this pose, you should turn your feet to face the side of the stage and
keep your hips squared toward the side of the stage. Then rotate your shoulders to face the
judges while strongly flexing your abs and intercostals. You can either have both arms at your
sides or one hand on your hip. Turn your head toward the judges and keep your chin up. Your
smile should look genuine.




                                BACK POSE
After the side pose, you will be asked to quarter turn once again and face the back of the stage
for the back pose. You should have your feet and hips facing toward the back of the stage. Lift
your ribcage up as high as you can and flare your lats as you flex them. Your arms should be
out toward your sides at about a 45-degree angle. You have the option to place one hand on
your hip. Lean back very slightly and keep your head up.
                       Women’s Physique
         FRONT STANDING RELAXED
When you first walk out on stage with the other competitors, you will be lined up, and you
should immediately execute the front standing relaxed pose. The judges will not call out this
pose because you are expected to go directly into it.
   To properly perform a front standing relaxed pose, face the judges. When executing any
pose, run through a checklist of where your body parts should be from the ground up. As you
face the judges, set your feet just a bit narrower than shoulder width, with your toes slightly
turned outward to enhance quad sweep. Flex your quads, pushing your feet against the ground,
almost as if you were trying to push your feet through the floor. Shift your hips back ever so
slightly so they cause separation in your upper quads. Next, raise your ribcage as high as you
can and pull your abdominal wall in as far as you can. Imagine trying to touch your navel to
your spine. Flare your lats and keep your arms out at your sides at roughly a 45-degree angle,
your hands open. Do not make a fist. Keep your shoulder girdle down, keep your chin up, and
aim to have a relaxed facial expression in all poses.
            SIDE STANDING RELAXED
After the front standing relaxed pose, the judges will say, “Quarter turn.” Always turn to the
right. Then go directly into the side standing relaxed pose.
   Start the side standing relaxed pose by facing the side of the stage. Your feet should be
touching or almost touching, with the foot closest to the judges about one or two inches (2.5-5
cm) in front of the other foot. Slightly bend the knee closest to the judges. Keeping your rib
cage down or in a neutral position, flex your abs and pull your abdominal wall in as far as you
possibly can. Flex your pecs and turn your shoulders very slightly to open up to the judges. Use
your back arm to slightly push into your back pectoral. Do not make a fist. Keep your chin up
and your head facing to the side of the stage. Do not look at the judges in the side standing
relaxed pose.
           REAR STANDING RELAXED
After the side standing relaxed, the judges will say, “Quarter turn to the right.” You should face
the back of the stage with your back toward the judges and then go into the rear standing
relaxed pose. Start with your feet just narrower than shoulder width. Turn your toes slightly out
to the sides so that your outer quads will be visible from the back. Bend your knees a little and
flex your hamstrings by imagining pressing your heels backward. You should then squeeze
your glutes. Flare and flex your lats as you bring your arms to your sides at roughly a 45-
degree angle and open your hands. Do not make a fist. Lean back ever so slightly and keep
your head up.
   After your rear standing relaxed, the judges will once again say, “Quarter turn.” You will
face the other side. At this point, perform your side standing relaxed pose while facing the
other direction.
               FRONT DOUBLE BICEPS
The front double biceps pose is often called first in the mandatory posing round. You can set
your feet in one of two ways. You may either keep your legs stationary as they are in the front
standing relaxed pose, or you may bring one leg forward to display the quad. Pull your ribcage
up as you pull in your abdominal wall as far as you can. Raise your arms up to your sides with
your elbows just slightly in front of your torso. Flex your biceps with a slightly open fist and
one arm extended a little higher than the other. Keep your chin up and your shoulders down.
SIDE CHEST WITH LEG EXTENDED
After the front double biceps pose, the judges will ask you to quarter turn and face the side.
The first pose usually called is the side chest pose. In this pose, fully extend the leg closest to
the judges and flex the quads. Your thigh should be at about a 35- to 55-degree angle to the
floor as you squat down just slightly. Place your ribcage in a neutral position while you flex
your abs and intercostals and pull your abdomen inward as far as you can. Extend your hands
in front of you, with your arms straight out and flex your pecs and triceps as you twist your
torso ever so slightly toward the judges. Keep your shoulder down and your chin up.
              SIDE TRICEPS WITH LEG
                    EXTENDED
The side triceps pose begins with your feet and legs set just as they are in the side chest pose,
with one leg fully extended and quads flexed. However, instead of clasping your hands in
front, you clasp them behind your back. You can do this by either locking your fingers together
or using your back hand to grab the wrist of your front hand. Keep your torso in an upright
position as you flex your abs and intercostals while pulling your abdominal wall in as far as
you can. Open your body ever so slightly toward the judges but do not pull your arm behind
you. Your goal should be to display the triceps prominently to the judges. Do not shrug your
shoulders; this is a common mistake. Keep your chin up.
  BACK (OR REAR) DOUBLE BICEPS
After you complete the side mandatory poses, the judges will have you quarter turn toward the
back of the stage. Typically, they then call out rear double biceps pose, sometimes called the
back double biceps pose. Place one foot behind you and spike the calf. Sometimes the judge
specifies which calf you should spike. If he or she does not specify which foot to place behind,
pick the one you feel most comfortable with. Place your foot behind your other foot
approximately 10 to 15 inches (25-38 cm). Your knees should be turned outward slightly and
bent just a little. Flex both hamstrings by digging your feet against the floor, as if you were
trying to perform a leg curl. Flex and squeeze your glutes tightly. Bring your arms out to your
sides and flex your biceps and the entire muscularity of your back. Keep your fists slightly
open as you raise one arm a little higher than the other. You should not pinch your shoulder
blades together. Instead, keep them open so that your back stays wide. Lean your torso back
ever so slightly toward the judges.
   HANDS OVERHEAD ABDOMINAL
       (OR AB AND THIGH)
After the back poses, the judges may have you perform the side chest and side triceps poses on
the other side. Then they bring you back around to the front for the hands overhead abdominal
pose. This pose is also sometimes called the ab and thigh pose. Begin by placing one leg in
front of the other and spiking the calf. Sometimes the judges specify which leg they want to
see. If they do not specify which leg to place forward, use the leg you are most comfortable
with. Flex the quads in both legs, but make sure you prominently display the quads on the
forward leg. Raise your hands and place them behind your head. Then flex your abs as hard as
you can while you slightly crunch down to increase the contraction. Keep your pecs and arms
flexed as you perform this pose.
                           Figure (Women)
                               FRONT POSE
The first pose you do is the front pose. To start this pose, you should have your feet together.
Your quads should be flexed, your hips slightly shifted back. Pull the ribcage up and pull in
your abdomen as far as you can. The lats should be flared, with your arms out to your sides at
about a 35- to 45-degree angle. The arms should be flexed but not rigid. Keep your shoulders
down and your chin up. Your smile should look genuine.




                                  SIDE POSE
After the front pose, you will quarter turn to the right to face the side of the stage for the side
pose. Keep your feet together and flex your quads, hamstrings, and glutes. Keep your ribcage
up and your abs pulled in. Keep your arms flexed but not rigid. Open your torso very slightly
toward the judges. Keep your chin up and shoulders down. Smile but do not turn your head
toward the judges on the side pose.




                                BACK POSE
The figure back pose should begin with your feet together, and your hair, if it is down, should
be swept out of the way so the judges can see your whole back. Keep the hamstrings and glutes
flexed, with your hips slightly shifted back. Shifting the hips causes the skin on the glutes to
tighten, which is important. Pull the ribcage up while you flex and flare your lats. Keep your
arms flexed but not rigid. Your shoulders should be down and your chin up.
                            Bikini (Women)
                              FRONT POSE
When executing the front pose in bikini, the goal is to minimize the width of your waist as
much as possible while displaying the width of your shoulders. This is where the subtlety of
bikini posing and individuality can be a key factor. Place your feet approximately shoulder-
width apart. Shift your hips to one side. This maximizes the amount of curve displayed on your
physique. Pull your abs in as far as possible and twist your hips away from the judges to show
the smallest part of your waist. If possible, do not square your hips directly toward the judges.
Lift your ribcage high as your shoulders face the judges. Your arms can either be out at the
sides or one hand may be placed on the hip. Be sure to smile and display confidence.
                                 BACK POSE
The back pose for bikini is just as subtle as the front pose. When the judges ask you to half
turn, you should transition smoothly to face the back of the stage. Once you are facing the back
of the stage, your feet should be about shoulder-width apart or slightly wider. Your hair, if it is
down, should be swept out of the way to display your back musculature. Shift your hips back
to tighten your hamstrings and glutes, but do not bend over. Arch your back, with your chest
and ribcage up. Slightly flex your back and arms while making it look natural and effortless.




POSING ROUTINES AND T-WALKS
Every bodybuilding show will have a round for posing routines and T-walks.
This round can vary depending on which sanction you compete in. In some
sanctions, posing routines are mandatory, in some they are optional, and others
only allow the top five to perform a routine. Check the rules of your sanctioning
organization. In most sanctions, posing routines are not judged. They are purely
for enjoyment. There are a few sanctions where the routines are judged and
scored, so once again, check the rules of your sanctioning organization. You will
not perform both a routine and a T-walk. Some divisions perform routines, and
others do T-walks.


Posing Routines
Posing routines are performed in men’s and women’s bodybuilding, classic
physique, and women’s physique.
    A typical posing routine is usually about 30 to 90 seconds long, depending on
the sanction you are competing in. Often, you choose your own music and need
to prepare a copy to bring with to the show. However, check with the show
promoter because some shows play house music for everyone.
    During your routine, you should present your body to your best ability by
hitting poses that highlight your strengths and hide your weaknesses. For
example, if you have a weak back, but your chest and quads are good, put more
front poses into your routine and very few back poses, if any. Aim to execute the
poses that you think are your best while staying away from your worst poses.
Transitions between poses should be smooth and seem effortless. Have a plan
for poses that can be easily executed and quickly transitioned into the next pose.
    It is often better to perform a good but shorter routine that highlights your
best areas rather than to have it go on too long and possibly expose your weak
areas. You do not need to use all your allotted time. If you are allowed 60
seconds but only need 45 seconds to effectively perform your routine, you can
wave to the audience and walk off the stage to end your routine.


T-Walks
T-walks are performed in figure, men’s physique, and bikini. T-walks are
different from posing routines, but both have the goal of presenting your body to
your best ability by hitting poses that highlight your strengths and hide your
weaknesses. Aim to execute the poses that you think are your best while staying
away from your worst poses.
   The name T-walk comes from the points in which you walk across the stage.
With posing routines, you are allowed to use the entire stage; however, with T-
walks, you have specific marks on the stage where you must stop and execute a
pose. Each show will have a slightly different set of rules for how and where you
enter onto the stage. Therefore, be flexible.
    There is usually a point in the back center of the stage where the first pose
will be executed. You do not have to perform any specific pose; instead, you can
choose the poses that highlight your physique at each mandated spot. After your
first pose, you will usually either be asked to walk toward the front center of the
stage or break off to the left or right to the next spot. As stated earlier, the exact
order in which you will be asked to walk is up to the show promoter or the
sanction. However, the points you hit will be back center, front center, left of
stage, and right of stage. You should have one or two poses prepared for each
spot. Most T-walks are allotted 60 to 90 seconds. Make sure you know your time
and use it accordingly.


EFFECTIVE PRACTICE POSING
When preparing for a bodybuilding show, practicing your posing is a crucial part
of setting yourself up for success. All too often, people devote hours and hours
to practicing for a show, but they are not actually practicing effectively. You
should not only work hard at your posing and put in the time but also know
precisely what you need to accomplish with all that effort and time invested.
This is where most competitors go wrong. Let us look at the two major
components to proper posing practice and how to execute them.


Practicing Posing Technique
Often, newer competitors spend hours practicing posing and making sure they
can hold a pose for lengthy periods of time; however, the pose they are holding
is poorly executed and will cost them points onstage. In this case, all time and
effort have been wasted.
    Before you focus on being able to hold poses, practice how to effectively
perform the poses. Although we gave you a rundown of how to execute the
poses in the previous sections, that is only a basic description of how to pose.
Posing is a lot like trying on clothes: While a shirt or a pair of pants may be
tailored the same way, the subtleties of how it looks on different bodies can
either make it a great fit or a terrible fit.
    To fine-tune your posing, you must practice. Start with the base example of
the poses we listed previously, and then try slight variations to see how they
look. This is simply a process of trial and error. Little things like seeing what
happens if you raise your hands slightly higher or lower, place your elbows
slightly forward or backward, or turn your feet inward or outward a bit more can
all have a profound effect from person to person. The goal of practicing posing
technique is to find the precise way that each pose looks best for you.
Experimentation is the key here.
    We recommend beginning practicing posing technique at least from the first
day of your contest prep or, even better, starting in the off-season. Spend at least
10 to 15 minutes each day trying out various techniques. In this stage of posing
practice, you do not need to worry about holding your poses. Instead, simply
practice various hand, foot, and elbow placements, or even try various ways of
flexing different body parts. Over time, you will find what looks best for you.

 FAQ: Should I practice the poses while wearing my
 posing suit?
 Yes, you should practice posing in your suit. Being on stage feels
 uncomfortable for many. You should make everything as close to how it will
 be on show day as possible so that you are completely comfortable when you
 get out there.


Practicing Posing Conditioning
Over the course of your entire prep and possibly your off-season, work on your
posing technique. However, starting eight weeks out, your focus should switch
from posing technique to posing conditioning. This is where you condition
yourself to be able to hold your poses onstage without tiring. It is not often
talked about, but this is typically a grueling part of contest prep. Posing can be
exhausting and painful. If you fail to practice, you will not be able to flex and
hold your poses effectively onstage without tiring. It is common to see a
competitor come onstage and look amazing. However, as the comparison rounds
drag on, you can see him or her begin to fade because he or she is tiring and is
not as sharp or perhaps is unable to continue flexing since exhaustion is setting
in. Many times, you also see shaking as a result. To avoid this, you must
practice.
   The following are our recommendations for how to structure your posing
conditioning practice.

The Setup
Since you have already been practicing your posing technique, you should easily
be able to execute each pose. At this stage of your prep, begin practicing posing
without looking at a mirror. There will be no mirror onstage, so you need to start
learning how to pose without looking at yourself. We recommend setting up a
video camera or using your smartphone to record your sessions. This way, you
can pose without looking at yourself, but you can then watch the session later to
see what mistakes you may have made.

The Execution
The important part of posing conditioning practice is to pose nonstop for a
specified period. We recommend that you simply simulate show day. This
means to practice running through the standing relaxed and mandatory
comparison poses because the judge will call them on show day. Each time you
hit a pose and then relax, you should return to your standing relaxed pose. You
need to push yourself to keep posing hard, just as you will on show day.
Continue running through all the poses repeatedly until your time is up.

The Timing
To start your posing practice, we recommend that at eight weeks out, you begin
by posing as described above for nine minutes continuously every day. This
should be difficult to start but achievable. From that point, you should aim to add
one and a half minutes to your time every fourth day. This means that after four
days, you start posing for 10-1/2 minutes each day; by the eighth day, you begin
posing for 12 minutes each day; and beginning on the twelfth day, you will pose
for 13-1/2 minutes each; and so on. If you continue in this fashion, by show day,
you should be able to hold your poses for 30 minutes straight without stopping at
all. If you pushed yourself hard during your posing practice, you will be more
than ready to handle whatever the judges throw at you on show day.
FAQ: Should I pose in a sauna?
People pose in a sauna to lose water weight. If this is the intention, we do not
recommend it. However, posing in a sauna or possibly in a bathroom with a
hot shower running has the advantage of helping you practice in heat. The
lights on stage are typically hot, and you will be sweaty. It can be a new
sensation for a lot of competitors who are used to being cold while posing.
Just make sure you shorten your posing duration slightly if you do pose in a
sauna and stay well hydrated.


Take-Home Points
  ▶ Proper posing can make or break your placing onstage. Therefore,
   understand what the judges are looking for in each pose within your
   division.
  ▶ In most competitions, you need to also prepare a posing routine or T-
   walk. Competitors in men and women’s bodybuilding, classic physique,
   and women’s physique do posing routines, but competitors in men’s
   physique, figure, and bikini do T-walks. The details of posing routines and
   T-walks may differ from sanction to sanction, so consult the show details
   for more information.
  ▶ Posing practice is critical to your success onstage. Begin posing technique
   practice either in the off-season or at the start of contest prep to ensure that
   you are performing each pose in a way that best suits your physique. At
   eight weeks out, begin working on practicing posing conditioning, where
   you then hold your poses for increasing periods of time. This ensures you
   can handle whatever the judges throw at you on show day.
                                                                                  9
The Finishing Touches and Final
Preparation



There is a difference between competing and being a competitor. True
competitors leave no stone unturned. They step on stage looking polished and
leaving no doubt that they are truly ready. This all comes down to the small
details. During contest prep, your focus should be on being consistent with your
nutrition and training and adjusting as necessary to keep progressing toward
looking your best on show day. However, other considerations during contest
prep should be addressed before the day of the contest so show day goes as
smoothly as possible. This chapter covers these less-discussed details of contest
prep.


POSING PRACTICE
As discussed in the previous chapter, you should begin to practice your posing
technique in the off-season or, at least, at the start of contest prep to be sure you
are performing poses in a way that best shows your physique. Once you are
comfortable with your posing technique, practice holding poses for a longer
time. This will ensure that you are ready for anything thrown your way on show
day.


POSING MUSIC
You will also need to begin putting together a posing routine prior to your
competition. What is expected and allowed in a posing routine differs between
divisions and sanctions, so it is vital to find out the details for your specific
competition. In addition, the importance of a posing routine differs from
sanction to sanction. Some sanctions judge the posing routine (so you will need
to put more emphasis on practicing your routine), while others do not judge
posing routines. Moreover, some shows may not have you do a routine at all, or
it may only be optional.
    If you need to bring your own music, be sure that you put together your music
—well in advance of show day—cut to where you plan on starting your routine.
Most shows will ask you to either supply your music as a CD or MP3. However,
some shows may only have house music played for all competitors during their
routine. When in doubt, check with the sanction or show you plan to compete in
for more information.
    Pick music that you enjoy and that does not contain inappropriate language.
Base the type of music you use on the type of routine you plan to perform and
your physique. For example, if you are a mass monster hitting most muscular
variants left and right, something like hard rock is going to be a good choice.
However, if you have a more aesthetic physique and plan to hit a number of
classic and nonmandatory poses, a more instrumental music selection may be
best. However, there is no right or wrong choice here, and most of the time the
routine is not judged so you can feel free to make it your own.


POSING SUIT
Competitors in each division wear a different type of posing suit. For example, a
bikini competitor has a different posing suit than a figure competitor does, and a
men’s physique competitor has a different posing suit than a male bodybuilder
does. The types of posing suits required or even allowed in a division may differ
between sanctions. Consult the information provided by your sanction before
ordering your suit.
   If you plan to purchase a posing suit, order it at least 12 weeks before your
competition. This gives the suit manufacturer time to receive your
measurements, make your suit, and send it to you. You then have enough time to
try on your suit and send back for alterations, if necessary.
   Posing suits can be expensive, especially for female competitors. To cut
costs, some competitors with fashion sense and sewing skills may make their
own suits. There are also suit rental services available for those looking for
another cost-effective solution.


SHOES
Women in bikini and figure need to purchase clear heels. Generally, four- or
five-inch (10-13 cm) heels are recommended because they help create the
illusion of elongated legs more so than shorter heels. Many women may not be
comfortable wearing such a high heel, so it may be helpful to wear heels more
frequently during daily life to increase comfort. Ultimately, a competitor needs
to be comfortable enough in heels so that it does not look like she is struggling
as she walks around onstage because this can negatively affect placing.


JEWELRY
Competitors in bikini and figure should purchase jewelry that sparkles under the
stage lights. Jewelry worn onstage can be described as “over the top” or
“costume jewelry.” However, competitors can find cheap, shiny jewelry without
having to spend much money. Those with questions about stage jewelry should
consult the information provided by the sanction for their class, pictures and
video from previous competitions within the sanction they plan to compete, or
both.


HAIR REMOVAL
Removal of body hair is necessary to see muscle detail under stage lighting.
Even fine, light-colored hair can affect a competitor’s appearance onstage and
should be removed before competition. There are several different hair removal
methods available, such as shaving, waxing, and laser removal, among others.
   Those who plan to shave should avoid doing the first shave immediately
before the show. This is especially true for males with a lot of hair to remove.
The initial shave often results in razor burn or cuts, especially for those who are
inexperienced; therefore, it may be advisable to begin shaving a couple of weeks
before the competition to avoid razor burn and cuts on show day.
TANNING
The ideal type of tan depends on your skin complexion, preference, and the
division you will compete in. In general, the more extreme the look required for
your division, the darker your tan needs to be because a dark tan helps show
more detail under the bright stage lights. Bodybuilders need to be extremely dark
while those competing in bikini should aim for a more natural look under stage
lights. However, even a natural look onstage needs to be significantly darker
than normal skin pigmentation for most competitors. Competitors in classes such
as figure or men’s physique should strive to find a middle ground.


Tanning Products
There are number of different options for self-tanning products, and most
competitions provide tanning services for a fee. Most self-tanning products fall
into two categories.

Oil-Based Products
The most common oil-based tanning product is Dream Tan. This product does
not absorb into the skin or dry well, which makes it a poor choice for the bikini
and men’s physique divisions. However, it does provide a very dark color and a
shine due to the oil in the product. Dream Tan is not allowed at all competitions.
Make sure you check the rules for your show to ensure it is allowed.

Stain-Based Products
Unlike oil-based tanning products, stain-based products absorb into the skin and
dry well. They stick on the skin and leave the skin darker for a few days after the
competition. The most common stain-based products are Pro Tan, Jan Tana, and
Dark As. Pro Tan and Jan Tana tend to give a lighter, more natural color under
stage lights (keep in mind this will still be very dark when not under stage
lighting). Dark As results in a much darker color, like oil-based products.


 FAQ: Do all competitions allow the same type of tan?
 Competitions may differ in the type of tanning product allowed. Some
 sanctions or competitions may not allow an oil-based tan. Consult information
 regarding your specific competition for more information on the type of
 tanning products allowed.


Other Considerations
Those using stain-based tanning products need oil to put over the tan before
going onstage. Most stain-based products have an oil product recommended to
use with the tanning product. Competitors using Dream Tan do not need to use
oil because of the oil already in the product. (In fact, baby wipes are a great way
to remove Dream Tan after a competition.)
    Before using a particular self-tanning product you’re not used to, do a
practice run ahead of time so that you know you will be able to achieve your
desired look when it counts.

 FAQ: Do I need to get a base tan in a tanning bed before
 my competition?
 For most tanning products, a base tan in a tanning bed is not necessary before
 competition. However, we would recommend following the guidelines
 provided by your tanning product of choice.


MAKEUP AND HAIR
Female competitors apply the tan up to the neck; the face is covered with
makeup. This is likely significantly darker than what is worn in daily life to
match the tan. In addition, a figure or bikini competitor’s hair needs to be done
in a way that makes it appear feminine (e.g., worn down). Many contests now
provide services (for a fee) for makeup and hair that can remove the stress of
doing them yourself on show day. However, these services book quickly, and
appointments may fall behind on show day. If you are going to use these
services, be on time for your appointments so that you are not the reason things
fall behind.
    For those doing their own makeup, look for what you will use ahead of time.
Place some of your tanning product on your arm or leg before shopping for
makeup. You should attempt to match the tan color as best as possible and err on
the side of your makeup being slightly lighter than your tanning product but not
drastically lighter to avoid having a white face and tan body onstage. Many
competitors also purchase fake lashes and brightly colored lipstick. Ultimately,
the overall look of your makeup for the stage needs to be much more drastic than
daily life.
   Competitors doing their own hair and makeup are also encouraged to practice
ahead of time to be sure things go smoothly on show day. Ideas and makeup tips
can often be found in online videos and tutorials.
   Men may also need to determine their show-day hair products, depending on
their hairstyles. Hair can be styled in the same way it is worn every day. Those
with facial hair should be sure that it is nicely groomed.


OTHER LOGISTICAL DETAILS
When you are preparing for a show, failing to attend to the details that need your
attention can, in the least, result in an inconvenience come show day, or, at the
worst, result in you preparing for a show but not being allowed to compete. Just
as you carefully prep your food and your training, be sure to handle other
logistical details.


Contest Entry Form
Contest entry forms need to be mailed in before your competition. There are
deadlines for regular entry and late entry (which is typically more expensive).
Competitors choose which divisions and classes they enter on the form. Most
competitions allow competitors to compete in more than one class as long as
they are eligible and pay a crossover fee.

 FAQ: When should I register for a show?
 The deadline for show registration is around one or two weeks before a
 competition. We recommend consulting with the show promoter to be sure
 you meet the deadline. Since the deadline is typically close to a competition, a
 competitor can use this to his or her advantage. We recommend first-time
 competitors—or those who have not been stage-lean before—have multiple
 possible target shows (if possible). That way a competitor can select which
 show or shows he or she will compete in closer to the show date to be stage-
 lean by the competition time. We realize this may not be possible for all
 competitors due to schedules, location of competitions, and budget, but we
 still recommend not registering for a competition until you are sure you will
 be ready for it.


Sanction Card
Competitors also need to buy a sanction card and, if the contest is drug-tested,
set up a time for their drug test (testing typically occurs on the day before the
competition). A sanction card can usually be purchased at show check-in, and
drug-testing times may not be set until closer to the show date. As a result, these
tasks can be done after you register for the contest. Consult the promoter of your
show for more information.


Travel and Hotel Arrangements
Unless you are one of the lucky few who can compete in your hometown, you
will arrange for travel before your show. Most competitions have a host hotel
that provides rooms at a discounted rate. However, do not feel you need to stay
at the host hotel if you find a better option nearby. Before booking a hotel, make
sure that your room has a refrigerator and microwave so that you can stay on
track with your food plan in the last hours leading up to your show.
    For most Saturday competitions, you should plan on arriving on Friday;
however, if you are driving or flying long distances, it may be a good idea to
arrive on Thursday. This gives any changes in water balance due to prolonged
sitting time to regulate back to normal before you step onstage to ensure you are
looking your best. In addition, arriving early can reduce stress and give you
additional time to tie up any loose ends before show day.

Take-Home Point
   ▶ Many competitors focus on nutrition, training, cardio, and posing
    practice. However, there are several smaller details to address before show
    day. These include choosing music; scheduling drug testing and
    purchasing a sanction card; purchasing posing suits, shoes, and jewelry;
getting a plan in place for tan, hair, and makeup on show day; and taking
care of travel arrangements.
                                                                               10
Peak Week Explained



It is Friday night, and you have a bodybuilding contest tomorrow. You have put
in weeks and months of brutal hard work. However, rather than feeling the pride
and excitement you should, your mind is consumed with one thought: “Dear
God, please let this work!”
    The next morning, you wake up and eagerly head over to the mirror. Your
heart drops; it is not a pretty sight. The once-glorious striations on display only a
week ago are now gone. The full and hard muscle bellies are replaced with a
soft, smooth, and saggy look. Everything just looks off.
    You hope that things look better once you get backstage and get a pump.
“That will surely fix the problem!” you tell yourself. Even though you are trying
to convince yourself all you need is to get a pump, you cannot help but run to a
mirror every 10 minutes and check your conditioning, hoping something
changes. It does not.
    As stage time approaches, you head backstage, nervously strip down to your
posing trunks, and begin pumping. As you pump feverishly and desperately, you
begin to realize that absolutely nothing is happening. No matter how hard you
try, you cannot get a pump.
    With nothing else to do, you line up with the other competitors and take the
stage. You are quickly moved to the end of the stage, where you remain until the
end of prejudging.
    As you head back to your hotel feeling defeated, your mind swirls with
thoughts of what could have gone so wrong. Was your sodium off? Was it too
many carbs or too few? Was it the water? You feel totally clueless about what
you could have done differently.
   This scenario is played out repeatedly, week after week, year in and year out.
Bodybuilders often completely sabotage themselves in the final week. Even if
things do not go terribly wrong, many competitors still notice they do not look as
good on show day as they did a week before. Even if it is only a small
difference, it is never a good feeling standing on stage knowing you could be
better.


PEAK WEEK
Bodybuilders and other physique athletes can hardly be faulted for confusion
and missteps regarding peak week. Most information that bodybuilders have
about peak week comes from so-called bodybuilding gurus, secondhand advice
from other competitors, and gym myths. Much of this is nothing more than
pseudoscience or outright nonsense.
   The lack of quality information also arises because there is no peer-reviewed
research about peaking for a bodybuilding show. There are a couple of reasons
for not having real research on the subject. First, peaking for a bodybuilding
show is a niche subject for a very niche market. Finding funding for a study like
this would be difficult.
   Second, even if funding were available, determining what constitutes an
optimal peak would be tough to quantify. It might be possible to conduct
effective peaking research by stacking multiple measurements together, such as
limb girth changes, BIA to measure total body water, DEXA, and possibly
ultrasound (or, even better, a CT scan or MRI). If you combined these, you
should be able to tell the difference in girth size, changes in body water, and,
hopefully, where the water is being stored. Unfortunately, this brings us back to
the issue of cost in executing so many different tests.
   With this chapter, we will lift the veil of mystery surrounding peak week. We
need to delve into the science behind the variables at play during peak week. We
can use plenty of research and information about how the human body functions
to extrapolate about how to properly peak.
   In addition to examining the human body’s function and processes, we offer
insight from our years of experience. To date, we have coached hundreds of
competitive physique athletes to the stage, including some of the top drug-free
bodybuilders in the world. The things we have learned from these real-world
experiences have been invaluable, and we look forward to sharing our findings.


PREREQUISITES FOR EFFECTIVE
PEAKING
Peaking cannot simply be done at random. It cannot transform someone in only a
week’s time. Remember that it is called peak week, not magic week. It will not
work miracles. An effective peak only enhances what you already have. There
are three primary prerequisites for effective peaking. Before you even think
about the possibility of peaking, you must meet these requirements.

Prerequisite 1: You Must Be Lean
This cannot be overemphasized and should be considered the absolute highest
priority. Before you can peak effectively for a bodybuilding show, you must be
lean, ripped, shredded, peeled, or any number of adjectives you use to describe
someone who is lacking body fat.
   We estimate that 90 to 95 percent of competitors are not lean enough going
into peak week. Many competitors are quick to say, “Once I lose this water
weight during peak week, I’ll look great. ” That statement is just dripping with
wishful thinking. It is almost never water weight that needs to be lost; it is fat. If
you see a pocket of fat anywhere on your body, then you need more diet time,
plain and simple.

Prerequisite 2: Know Your Baseline Macronutrient Intake
Many competitors who follow meal plans go into a show knowing the type and
quantity of foods they consume. For example, they may know that they eat eight
ounces (227 g) of chicken and one cup (about 200 g) of cooked rice for a meal,
but they do not actually know how much protein, carbs, and fat they are
consuming daily. This is a problem because if you do not know your current
intake, you will not be able to effectively cause change. Peaking is like reading a
map. To get where you want to go, you need to know where you are right now.

Prerequisite 3: Know Your Approximate Daily Water and Sodium Intake
For the same reasons you must know your macronutrient intake, you must know
your approximate daily intake of water and sodium. (Although you should know
your precise intake for your macronutrient intake, you need a close
approximation for water and sodium.) For the sake of precision, we suggest
closely tracking water and sodium about two or three weeks before peak week. It
is also a good idea to make sure your daily intake does not drastically fluctuate
from day to day.
   These three prerequisites are listed in order of importance. Being lean is the
highest priority. If you are not lean enough, attempting to peak will be futile, and
you will be better off simply picking a later show date to give yourself more
time to get leaner.


TERMINOLOGY AND
DEFINITIONS
Before discussing the specifics of various peaking plans, understand the
terminology associated with peak week. We realize that terminology may not
seem terribly important when trying to be your best on show day, but it is more
integral than most people realize. For example, compare this to the medical field.
If a nurse tells the doctor that a patient is dead when she really means that he is
in a coma, the doctor will react differently based on that word. A medical
professional must know the difference between death and a coma and accurately
identify the state. Likewise, a bodybuilder needs to be able to know the
difference between flat and spilled and be able to identify those states. Effective
peaking requires a constant analysis of one’s body state. If you cannot properly
identify the state your body is in, it is impossible to make the correct
adjustments.
    A lot of terms have been used when talking about the process of peaking, but
as far as we know, there is no complete list. The following are the common
essential peaking terms and what they mean:
   ▶ Flat: Muscles are not round or full because the muscle tissue is not
    pushing tightly against the skin.
   ▶ Full: Muscles have a rounded appearance and are typically pushing out
    tightly against the skin.
   ▶ Spilled (or spilled over): Excess subcutaneous water is present under the
    skin. This blurs definition and reduces visible striations and separation
    between muscles. This is typically accompanied by a full look but not
    always.
   ▶ Tight: Skin is pulled tightly against muscle tissue with no signs of spilling
    or excessive subcutaneous water.
   ▶ Vascular: The visible protrusion of superficial veins and arteries.
   ▶ Lean (or ripped or shredded): The absence of visible subcutaneous body
    fat.
   ▶ Holding water: This is a common term in bodybuilding, but it is not clear
    because the body is made largely of water. We are always holding water.
    The important thing is where the water is being held. The term is typically
    given to someone who does not look good. In our experience, it is usually
    used as a catch-all for several different things that have gone wrong with a
    peak.


PEAK WEEK OBJECTIVES
You may find it a bit silly to have an entire section devoted to objectives. We
can practically hear people thinking, “I only have one objective, bro, and that is
to be huge and shredded.” While this is an admirable goal, we need to get more
specific with how this is actually accomplished to make it happen. When you
break down each objective individually, a clearer picture of what is needed
begins to take shape.
   Our objectives for an effective peak week can be split into two different
categories: primary and secondary. Primary objectives have the largest impact
on whether our peak week will be a success or a failure. Therefore, they are of
primary importance. Secondary objectives still have an impact on our physique
but not to the degree of our primary objectives.

Primary Objective 1: Maximize Muscle Size and Fullness
You maximize muscle size and fullness through three mechanisms: optimizing
glycogen storage, keeping properly hydrated, and maintaining the sodium-
potassium balance.

Primary Objective 2: Maximize Muscular Definition and Tightness
Maximizing muscular definition and tightness is simply making sure every
striation, every muscle, and the separation between the muscle groups is as
visible and crisp as possible. Much of this is accomplished through minimizing
extra cellular water retention by controlling four main factors: optimizing
glycogen storage, minimizing glucose spill, avoiding dehydration, and
maintaining the sodium-potassium balance.

Secondary Objective 1: Manage Vascularity
Vascularity is controlled by managing three factors: adequate hydration, proper
sodium intake, and the regulation of substances in the bloodstream. Vascularity
is not actively judged on a bodybuilding stage; it can enhance or detract from the
look of a competitor depending on the division in which they are competing. The
appearance of visible veins can enhance the look of a bodybuilder on stage,
lending to a more extreme appearance. It is eye-catching and is usually a signal
to the judges that a person is lean and full. However, for women in the bikini or
figure divisions, vascularity can be a detriment. Bikini and figure do not call for
an extreme look, so it is best to reduce vascularity for these divisions or at least
not enhance it.

Secondary Objective 2: Create Consistency for Predictable Outcomes
You create consistency by eliminating unnecessary variables. Some of the best
ways to do this are by avoiding gastrointestinal (GI) tract issues and food
allergies through eating only familiar foods and avoiding inaccurate
measurements by not changing food sources too much.
   The results of a peak week should be predictable. You should not have to
cross your fingers and hope that it works. A proper peak week should be
measurable, predictable, and repeatable. Create as much consistency as possible
to reduce unnecessary risks and make the process more repeatable for future
shows.
   GI tract irritation and slight food allergies can come from eating unfamiliar
foods. Often, people believe that magic foods make for the best peak week,
while others tend to view their food choices as having no bearing at all on the
outcome. The truth is that while food choices are not magic, they do indeed
matter. If you have not eaten brown rice during the entire prep, it is not wise to
add it in three days out from the show.
   Another reason to stay with the same foods during every day of peak week is
that food labels can be incredibly inaccurate. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration allows a 20 percent margin of error on food labels. This means
that it is possible to eat a brand of cereal with a labeled caloric value 20 percent
below the actual value. If you were to switch brands during peak week, the new
brand label might list the caloric value 20 percent above the actual value. In this
instance, you would be consuming 40 percent more calories even though the
labels are the same. While this is an unlikely and extreme instance, this type of
inconsistency can add up. Changing food during peak week is usually an
unnecessary risk. After the show, you will be free to eat many foods that you
have been wanting to try.


PEAK WEEK OBJECTIVE
NONSTARTERS
These three objectives may seem simple enough, but as we will soon establish,
many factors must be managed to achieve one’s best look. The following are
what we refer to as peak week objective nonstarters—objectives that set you
up for failure before you even start.


Getting Leaner
Peak week is not for getting leaner. You should have lost all the body fat you
need to lose going into peak week. If you have to choose between trying to peak
properly or trying to get leaner, you will be better off just continuing to diet and
get leaner. Better yet, pick a different show and give yourself more time.


Dropping Water
Peak week is not for dropping water. We will cover this in depth, but dropping
water or dehydrating is not a goal.


Thinning the Skin
Thinning the skin is an absurd idea that needs to be abandoned. There is no way
to effectively thin the skin. Going into peak week with the idea that skin
thickness is an issue will lead to failure. If you think your skin is too thick, we
are certain that you just have more fat to lose.
CARBOHYDRATES
We covered our prerequisites, brushed up on common terminology, and
established clear objectives for peak week. Now we will get down to the nitty-
gritty of peak week and begin learning about the many working parts of peak
week. There is no better place to start than carbohydrates.
   Carbohydrates, water, and sodium are the primary variables in an
interconnected system of moving parts that we refer to as the peaking network.
There are other parts to the peaking network, but carbohydrates, water, and
sodium are the glue that hold everything together.
   When talking about carbohydrates, we could go down a nearly endless rabbit
hole discussing the various types, digestion, and metabolism of carbohydrates.
However, this information is not always necessary to know to peak properly.
Therefore, when it comes to carbohydrates, we cover the basics and the relevant
details specifically related to peaking.


Types
Carbohydrate, or carbs for short, is a macronutrient found in various foods.
Carbs are also referred to as saccharides, which can be divided into four groups:
monosaccharides, disaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides and disaccharides are smaller and have lower molecular
weight and are commonly referred to as sugar. Monosaccharides are comprised
of one sugar molecule (hence the prefix, mono) and disaccharides have two
monosaccharides (hence the prefix, di). Common monosaccharides are glucose,
fructose, ribose, and galactose. Common disaccharides include sucrose, which is
table sugar, and lactose, which is the sugar found in milk.
   Oligosaccharides and polysaccharides are complex carbohydrates because
they are made of up more sugar molecules. Oligosaccharides typically have 3 to
7 monosaccharides, and polysaccharides contain more than 10.


Digestion
Carb digestion begins with our saliva. The enzyme salivary amylase kicks off
the process. As we chew, this enzyme breaks the bonds between the sugar units
of the various sugars and starches. This breaks down some carbs into smaller
chains of glucose. Roughly only 5 percent of carbohydrates are broken down in
the mouth. This is probably a good thing. If every carbohydrate we ate was fully
broken down into glucose in our mouths, our teeth would probably rot out. The
demand for dentists would be incredible, and you would probably be practicing
dentistry rather than trying to be a bodybuilder! After the minimal digestion
taking place in the mouth, the carbohydrates go to the stomach. In the stomach,
no chemical digestion takes place, but there is some mechanical digestion from
stomach contractions.
   The carbohydrates then pass into the small intestine, where pancreatic
amylase starts to break down the dextrins (polysaccharides) into sequentially
smaller carbohydrate chains. While this is taking place, various enzymes also
released by the intestinal cells break down the specific types of carbohydrates
into singular sugar molecules. After carbohydrates are fully broken down into
their most basic units, they can then be transported into the intestinal cells.


Transportation, Absorption, and Storage
Once carbohydrates reach the intestines, the monosaccharide units of glucose,
fructose, and galactose are transported through the small intestine wall to the
portal vein (the blood vessel that carries blood to the liver from the GI tract and
spleen). The speed at which carbohydrates are absorbed can differ depending on
whether proteins or fats were consumed as well. Fats and proteins slow the rate
of absorption. Also, there are differences in the transportation paths of glucose,
fructose, and galactose and where they end up. However, it is important to know
that glucose is taken through the bloodstream to peripheral (noncentral) tissues.
Excess glucose is stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle tissue.
   So you may be asking, “Why do I need to know all this?” That is a valid
question. Knowing the basics of carbohydrate types, digestion, transportation,
absorption (also called assimilation), and storage is never a bad thing for a
bodybuilder. However, the main takeaway of this is that digestion,
transportation, and absorption take time. Competitors often try to carb up
minutes before heading out to the stage. There is no time for all this digestion
and assimilation. An effective carb-up needs to take place in the days before the
show, not the minutes and hours before the show.


Role of Glycogen
In peaking discussions, you will frequently hear glycogen mentioned because it
can greatly impact physique appearance. Glycogen is a polysaccharide that
serves as the primary source of stored carbohydrates in the body. It is mostly
stored in the muscle and liver cells. There are also small amounts of glycogen
stored in the kidneys and the brain. For our purposes, though, we will primarily
focus on the glycogen stored in the muscle tissue and liver.
    Glycogen can provide an advantage to a bodybuilder by increasing muscle
size and volume. A muscle packed full of glycogen will physically increase in
size. Obviously, a bigger muscle is something that all bodybuilders want, so
bodybuilders should try to completely fill their bodies’ glycogen storage spaces
without exceeding storage capacity. Eating more carbohydrates than the body
can store in muscle tissue and the liver will result in spilling or spillover. When
this happens, the additional glucose floats around outside the muscle cells,
blurring muscle definition. Obviously, this is not a good thing. When carbing up,
it is usually best to be slightly less filled rather than pushing things too hard and
spilling. A slightly flat look will appear much more crisp and complete versus a
slightly spilled one that looks puffy and blurry.
    One final factor when considering glycogen is the supercompensation effect.
Glycogen supercompensation is something that runners and other athletes have
been taking advantage of for quite some time (4), and bodybuilders are no
different. Always remember that the body strives for homeostasis, which is the
tendency toward a stable equilibrium. This means that when you push your body
in one direction, it typically corrects the imbalance as quickly as possible. It is
like a pendulum; when you swing it one way, it swings back the other direction.
Bodybuilders can use this advantage when carbing up. When the body is
depleted of glycogen for roughly three to five days, glycogen storage capacity
increases by about 10 to 20 percent. This means you can store more glycogen
and be a bit fuller by depleting first (5). This is indeed a viable option for
competing bodybuilders, but as we will see in the Peak Week Strategies section,
this is not always the best option.
    We will get deeper into peaking and carb-up strategies later in this chapter,
but one thing to note (based on the authors’ experience) is that the way carbs are
loaded seems to make a difference in the look achieved. When carbohydrate
levels are actively rising, the look tends to be fuller and more extreme. For
example, say we have two competitors carbed up to 90 percent of full capacity.
Now assume that the first competitor reached this point by coming up from 80
percent of his capacity while the second competitor reached this point by coming
from 100 percent. In our experience, the competitor whose carbohydrates have
been actively rising will have a bit fuller and tighter look. We cannot claim to
know the mechanism behind this, but this is something we have witnessed
through years of experience. It could be due to a miniature version of
supercompensation effect in that intracellular fluids tend to be retained more
effectively when coming from a more depleted state, but that is merely
speculation.
   Finally, while the amount of carbohydrate we consume influences glycogen
levels, we see that water and sodium also play a role in this process. We cannot
have proper storage of glycogen without the other factors in the peaking
network.


WATER
Cutting water before a bodybuilding competition is practically a time-honored
tradition. Walk into a bodybuilding show with a bottle of water and see all the
stares you get. The other competitors will treat you as if you have already given
up. Bodybuilders across the world still dehydrate, but is this practice effective?
   What is causing this epidemic of aquaphobia in the bodybuilding community?
The idea behind all this fear is that water under the skin blurs muscular
definition; therefore, if you dehydrate yourself, there will be no water under the
skin to blur definition. This seems like a nice, simple explanation, but the
physiology is not quite so simple, and numerous problems stem from
dehydrating to achieve a perfectly peaked physique.


Stored Glycogen to Water Ratio
In the carbohydrates section, we explained the importance of water for achieving
maximum muscle fullness. Water stored with muscle glycogen provides fullness
to our muscles. The ratio of glycogen to water is about one gram of glycogen for
every 2.7 grams of water (2). However, it is possible to be even higher than that
because some research shows it could be as high as a 1:3 or 1:4 ratio (3). That is
just how important water is and how much it is responsible for filling the
muscle.


Intracellular and Extracellular Fluid
Even though many people understand that the water stored with glycogen is
responsible for muscle fullness, they believe they can trick the system and keep
the water in the muscle while dehydrating the water not stored in the muscle.
These people fail to understand that water balance within the human body is
tightly regulated. The human body is roughly 60 percent water. Of this water,
about 65 percent is intracellular fluid (ICF) located in compartments inside the
body’s cells, including muscle cells (figure 10.1). The other 35 percent is
extracellular fluid (ECF) and is found outside the cells. Many people worry that
this 35 percent of bodily fluid causes smoothness on stage. However, not all
ECF is contained in spaces that would cause blurring of muscular definition. If
we look at a rough breakdown of ECF, we see that 80 percent is called
interstitial fluid and is found in the space between cells (called the interstitial
space), while the other 20 percent is found elsewhere, such as blood plasma.
    There are many misconceptions about how water is compartmentalized within
the body. Advertising for commercial diuretics and persistent myths have given
bodybuilders the impression that a layer of water underneath the skin hides
striated muscle. However, if this was how water was stored underneath the skin,
then we would see a lot of bodybuilders backstage simply poking themselves
with a pin and draining the water out. Clearly this is not the case because there is
not a layer of water underneath the skin.
    While you do not need to know what it looks like under the skin to peak
properly, peaking is not as simple as dropping water as many would have you
believe. The human body is complex, and trying to selectively alter one area of it
without altering other areas is impossible. Selective dehydration is not possible.




Figure 10.1 A closer look at interstitial fluid and intracellular fluid.
Interstitial Fluid
When it comes to extracellular fluid, the main area of concern for bodybuilders
should be interstitial fluid. This is the fluid found in the interstitial space that
can cause the blurring of muscular definition. It also contains various salts,
hormones, and other solutes such as glucose, sodium, and potassium. What can
you do to reduce the amount of interstitial fluid you hold? You cannot!
Remember, the body tightly controls water compartments. However, there is no
need to worry. The water balance of your body naturally works in your favor.
Most fluid in your body is held in the intracellular compartments, which is where
you want it because it provides fullness to your muscles. Plasma fluid is another
area to hold water because it means more blood flow and a better pump.
   You may be asking how people spill over if interstitial fluid is nothing to
worry about. That is a good question. In this situation, water is not the problem;
typically excess glucose (carbohydrates) is the problem. As we covered in the
Carbohydrates section, your goal should be to fill the muscle with as much
carbohydrate as possible. When you fill the muscle with glycogen, water
follows. However, once the muscle tissue has reached maximum capacity, the
glucose has nowhere else to go. In this case, the excess glucose will spill over
and tend to float around in the interstitial fluid. When this happens, water
follows the glucose in the interstitial space, and the amount of fluid in this space
increases. Always remember that water follows solutes. Wherever there is
glucose, sodium, or potassium, water will follow. So, we need to be sure that
solutes are placed where we want them and in the amounts we want. If we do
this, water can be kept high throughout peak week and will be stored where it
should. Any excess water is simply expelled from the body through urination.
This means that spilling and holding water—as most people think of it—is not
caused by water intake but most commonly by too many carbohydrates.
   An analogy can paint a clearer picture of why spilling over is the result of too
many carbs rather than water. Pretend that your body is like a bathtub with the
drain opened. When the faucet is turned on, water pours into the tub, but it drains
out just as quickly. Now throw sponges (which represents glucose) into the tub.
The water begins to stick (soak in) to the sponges in the tub but, as before, any
excess water drains out. If we continue to throw more sponges into the tub with
the faucet still on, more water will fill the sponges in the tub. However, if we
throw so many sponges into the tub that they overfill the tub with the faucet still
on, the water will start to spill over the top and end up all over the floor. In this
scenario, the water being on was not the problem. The problem was that we tried
to use more sponges than the tub could hold. Had we not breached the top of the
tub with the sponges, the water would have never spilled over.
    Spilling over occurs when we try to eat more carbohydrates than our bodies
can store as glycogen. Once glycogen stores are filled, the excess carbs will spill
out, and water will follow. Our goal should be to fill glycogen completely
without exceeding our capacity. This will maximize ICF and minimize ECF.
    With this knowledge, we must be like Goldilocks in our approach to carbing
up. A carb-up that is too small will have you saying, “This carb-up left me too
flat!” A carb-up that is too aggressive will leave you saying, “This carb-up left
me spilled and blurry!” However, if you hit the right amount, you will be left
saying, “This carb-up was juussst right.”
    As for water, we find that most people do well during peak week with a
steady intake of 1 to 2.5 gallons (3.8-9.5 liters) per day, every day up until show
day.

 FAQ: Would you ever recommend that a competitor cut
 water during peak week?
 In about 99 percent of cases, we do not recommend competitors cut water.
 The only case in which we might recommend that someone moderately cut
 water is if she is a bikini competitor who is too lean and too muscular for the
 bikini division. In this case, the goal of cutting water would be to make her
 look less lean and muscular in order to better fit the criteria of the bikini
 division. Everyone else should leave it in.


SODIUM-POTASSIUM BALANCE
While carbs and water are the main players in a proper peak week, sodium and
potassium can be the icing on the cake. These are often misunderstood and
underestimated factors in the peaking process. Some people massively adjust
(often incorrectly) these variables while others say that you should not touch
them. Which is correct? The truth is that you can enhance your look by
manipulating sodium and potassium but doing so only slightly is often the best
approach.
   The fear of sodium before a show comes with the idea that sodium makes you
hold water. This is true. As we covered in the last section, water follows solutes.
Sodium makes you hold additional water, carbohydrates make you hold water,
and potassium makes you hold water. However, the question should not be, “Am
I holding water?” It should be, “Am I holding water in the right places?”
Holding a higher than normal amount of water is a good thing if we are holding
that water in compartments that will enhance the look we want.
   For decades, bodybuilders have been cutting sodium before shows and
loading up on potassium. While everyone seems to do it differently, usually
people completely cut all additional sodium about three days out from the show
and then begin either taking potassium supplements or carb loading by eating
potatoes, which contain plenty of potassium. The myth of cutting sodium and
increasing potassium most likely arose because sodium is found in large
concentrations in the interstitial fluid, and potassium is found in large
concentrations in the ICF (table 10.1). When hearing this, people say, “Aha! I
knew I could reduce interstitial water! I will just cut sodium and load potassium,
and all water will follow potassium into the cell because there will be no sodium
to draw water to the interstitial space.”
   While this does appear to make sense, once again, it does not work that way
in real life. The first thing we need to know about sodium and potassium is that
they work together to control water balance in and out of the cells by the
sodium-potassium (NA-K) pump. The problem is that the pump requires both
sodium and potassium to operate correctly (figure 10.2).
   The NA-K pump works by transporting two potassium ions into the cell while
transporting three sodium ions out of the cell. Potassium cannot make it into the
cell to provide more fullness

Table 10.1 Average Sodium and Potassium Concentrations
                SODIUM CONCENTRATION           POTASSIUM CONCENTRATION
SOLUTE          (MMOL/L)                       (MMOL/L)
Interstitial    145                            4.1
fluid
Intracellular   12                             150
fluid
Data from Lote (1).


without sodium. If you cut sodium, then the NA-K pump will stop working, and
potassium will begin to pile up outside the cells and draw water to it. Once
again, this leads to spilling.
    Besides being an integral part of the proper functioning of the NA-K pump,
sodium is also a contributor to facilitating glucose transport into the cell. As you
can see in figure 10.2, sodium cycles into the cell with glucose and then cycles
out of the cell as potassium makes its way in. This process continues over and
over. If sodium were eliminated from this process, glucose would not make it
into the cells efficiently and neither would potassium. When this happens, both
potassium and glucose will begin to build up outside the cells. As they continue
to float around outside the cells, water will follow. When water starts to
accumulate outside the cells at abnormal levels, spilling happens yet again.
Therefore, eliminating sodium is yet another way you can cause spill and a
smoothing appearance to your physique. You must leave sodium in your diet to
look your best!
    In addition to proper intracellular and extracellular water balance, sodium
also controls blood volume. Higher sodium intakes lead to greater blood volume,
which leads to a greater pump, which leads to a bigger, fuller look. All great
things!
    With this knowledge, it should be clear that you should never cut sodium or
load potassium in excessive amounts. We have found that a ratio of 3:1 to 5:1 of
sodium to potassium work well for most people.
    Unfortunately, we cannot tell you exactly how much carbs, water, sodium,
and potassium you require during peak week. Each person has different
requirements, but once you understand how the variables all interact with each
other, you can try new and subtle combinations while avoiding disaster
situations. If you are already looking great going into peak week (which you
should be), then a conservative approach is always best when you are not sure
what to do.
Figure 10.2 The sodium-potassium pump.


PEAKING NETWORK
If you ever wondered why so many bodybuilders seem to mess up the peak, all
you need to do is look at figure 10.3. This chart clearly displays the needed
components and their relationships for an effective peak. Most bodybuilders try
to eliminate water and sodium, and they are effectively destroying any chance of
ever coming in at their best.
   The answer to effectively peaking lies largely within these components. Many
people ask what to do about proteins and fats during peak week. This can change
quite a bit based on what type of peak week strategy you employ. The strategy
largely depends on your situation, body type, and division. Let us explore some
of the best options.
Figure 10.3 The peaking network: The relationship between carbs, water, and
sodium.


PEAK WEEK STRATEGIES
Peak week strategies can be extremely confusing to those new to competition.
While we covered a lot of information in the last section regarding carbs, water,
and sodium, we did not cover how to structure these variables. This is where
peak week strategies come into play. When it comes to peak week strategy and
the information in this section, there are a few factors to consider.
   ▶ There is no right or wrong way to structure a peak week. Some peak week
    strategies are more appropriate for certain situations or certain people, but
    these are usually nuanced differences in results.
   ▶ The approaches are merely a guide, not a hard rule. While we list some of
    the most common structured setups, the combinations are practically
    endless. We are merely using our experience to provide a proper outline.
   ▶ Subtle changes to the variables are always more appropriate when you are
    less familiar with the process. If you have never tried a peaking strategy
    before, then be conservative with your changes, and, even better, practice
    it before show day.
   ▶ No peaking strategy should be rigid. When we work with our clients, we
    are constantly changing, adjusting, and adapting the plan during peak
    week. Do not be afraid to adjust variables on a day-to-day basis if you
    need to. Never be a slave to the plan.


Physique Management Peaking Strategies
If you are a novice or newer to peaking, we recommend using one of the
physique management peaking strategies because they allow for the greatest
day-to-day assessment and adjustments. With these peaking protocols, you can
judge your physique each day and make judgment calls for the day based on how
you look. Although you will have a general layout for how your week should
progress, they are easily adjustable and safely executed because the changes are
subtle.
   It is important to note that all peak week structures are named after the stage
of the week in which the carbohydrates are loaded.

Front-Load Peaking Protocol
As the name implies, the front-load peaking protocol has carbs loaded at the
front of the week (figure 10.4). Typically, carbohydrates should be loaded on the
Saturday and Sunday (possibly Monday as well, if needed) before a show. Carbs
should be loaded over these two or three days to the point where a bit of spilling
occurs. This ensures complete filling of available glycogen storage space. As the
week progresses, taper carbs down to clean up the spillover. As the spill is
cleaned up, definition and crispness improves. Typically, carbs should then be
increased Friday before the show or on the morning of the show.
    Protein and fat should be slightly lower on days when carbs are highest, but
for the most part, they should stay rather steady with where intake was at during
the entire contest prep. Keep water intake high and consistent throughout the
week. Sodium should follow closely along the path of carbohydrates, with a bit
more of an increase on Friday and again on show day.
    The front-load peaking protocol is best for bikini and figure divisions. It is
also great for beginner bodybuilders, or those less familiar with the peaking
process or those who want a conservative and easy-to-execute peak week. This
is the most conservative of all the peaking strategies and the option that has the
least chance of something going wrong.
   The primary advantage of this peaking strategy is safety, but it also creates a
tight yet less extreme look perfect for bikini and figure. It can also create a good
look for bodybuilders; however, it is just a slightly less full look when compared
to some other peaking methods. This method is also useful for bodybuilders who
show signs of insulin resistance because they blur when they carb up. It allows
someone to carb up yet lets any blurring dissipate over the course of the week. In
this instance, you may not want to bring carbohydrates up on Friday before the
show. Instead, you would just continue to taper down.




Figure 10.4 Front-load peaking protocol.

Mid-Load Peaking Protocol
The mid-load peaking protocol typically begins with carbs lower at the
beginning of the week (figure 10.5). Slowly build carbs as the week progresses,
with carbohydrates hitting a high point on either Wednesday or Thursday. With
this strategy, you may want to see only slight spilling when you load up; then
you can use Friday, or Thursday and Friday, to then taper carbohydrates, clean
up the spill, and sharpen up.
   Protein and fat should be slightly lower on days when carbs are highest, but
for the most part, they should stay steady with where intake was at during the
entire contest prep. Keep water intake high and consistent throughout the week.
Sodium should track closely with carbohydrate intake, with a possible increase
on Friday as well as on show day.
   The mid-load peaking protocol is best for bikini, figure, and men’s physique
divisions. It is also great for beginner bodybuilders, bodybuilders who are less
familiar with the peaking process, or those who want a conservative and easy-to-
execute peak week. While this is not as conservative as the front-load protocol, it
is still conservative and easy to execute.




Figure 10.5 Mid-load peaking protocol.

    The primary advantage of this peaking strategy is safety, and it tends to create
a bit more fullness than a front-load peak. Mid-load peaking works well for
bikini and figure competitors who need additional fullness come show day. This
peaking method is also useful for bodybuilders who show signs of insulin
resistance because they blur when carbing up. It allows someone to carb up and
lets any blurring dissipate over the day or two before the show, when carbs are
tapered.

Slow Back-Load Peaking Protocol
Slow back-load peaking begins with carbs low at the beginning of the week
(figure 10.6). As you slowly increase carbs as the week progresses, you will
notice your physique getting tighter and filling out a bit more each day. With this
peaking strategy, you should never aim to spill at any point during the week.
Your goal is to hit your highest carbohydrate intake on Friday. If at any point
during the week you notice that you are starting to spill over, taper carbs
downward for the remaining days, and in effect you will turn it into a mid-load
peak.
    Protein and fat should be slightly lower on days when carbs are highest, but
for the most part, they should stay rather steady with the same intake as the rest
of contest prep. Keep water intake high and consistent throughout the week.
Sodium should track rather closely with carbohydrate intake, with a possible
increase on Friday as well as show day.
    The slow back-load peaking protocol is a versatile peaking strategy for all
divisions. In divisions where a subtler look is required (bikini and figure),
carbohydrates should be increased more subtly, and in divisions where a more
extreme look is required (bodybuilding and physique), a more drastic
carbohydrate increase looks best.
    This peaking strategy is a bit harder to execute than a front- or mid-load as
you aim to perfectly predict your highest carb intake on the day before the show.
If you guess wrong, it could leave you too flat on show day or spilled if you are
too aggressive. However, if done correctly, this is an excellent peaking strategy
that can offer a variety of looks depending on how drastically carbohydrates are
increased. Since this peaking strategy is a bit more risky than a front-load or
mid-load, it may not be a bad idea to run through a mock peak week with it if
you are early to ensure that you know what to expect during peak week.




Figure 10.6 Slow back-load peaking protocol.


Glycogen Supercompensation Peaking Strategies
As the name implies, glycogen supercompensation peaking involves trying to
take advantage of the supercompensation effect seen when carbohydrates are
depleted. Initially, many bodybuilders are drawn to these forms of peaking.
However, any peaking strategy that employs more drastic changes and measures
also has a greater chance of going wrong. With physique management peaking
strategies, you can use subtle changes and day-to-day analysis to ease into the
look that you want. With glycogen supercompensation peaking, you typically get
one chance to get it right, and if you are wrong, then things will not look good
on show day. While these peaking methods are effective, you absolutely must
know what you are doing and have practiced them.

Back-Load Peaking Protocol
Back-load peaking typically begins with a carbohydrate deplete phase (figure
10.7). Remember that glycogen depleting is the most effective when it is set up
as a carbohydrate deplete, not a calorie deplete. To set up a proper deplete,
calories should be within 200 calories of where your dieting intake was. For
example, if you had finished your contest prep on 2,000 calories per day, then
your deplete should likely be 1,800 to 2,200 calories per day. If you feel you
could be a little leaner, you should set your caloric intake 200 calories below
your normal dieting amount. If you feel that you are lean enough, then you can
set your caloric intake exactly where you have been dieting or even slightly
above. The amount of carbohydrates eaten during a deplete phase depends
largely on the individual. However, we have noticed that most people need to
deplete




Figure 10.7 Back-load peaking protocol.

with carbohydrates in the range of 50 to 100 grams per day. Once carbohydrate
intake has been set, protein and fat intakes should be increased to reach calorie
goals for the day.
   A deplete phase should not run too long or you risk muscle loss, flattening out
so much that you cannot fully refill glycogen levels by show day, or both.
However, the deplete phase needs to be long enough to fully deplete glycogen
stores. Ideally, you want the phase to be about three or four days long.
   Once you have fully depleted, the carb-up should begin either Wednesday or
Thursday before the show and extend through Friday. While some people have
two or three days of the same carbohydrate intake, we have found that building
carbs each day works well as long as the carb increase is aggressive. The amount
of carbohydrates you can handle during these carbohydrate-loading days varies
drastically from person to person. For this reason, we recommend practicing this
peaking style before using it for an actual contest. When executed properly,
however, back-load peaking can be effective.
   As mentioned, during the deplete phase, protein and fat intakes should be
higher to bring calorie levels where needed. However, during the loading days,
protein and fat intakes should be dropped to a slightly lower intake than what
was normal during the entirety of contest prep. Water intake should be kept high
and consistent throughout the week. Sodium should track rather closely with
carbohydrate intake.
   The back-load peaking protocol is best for men’s and women’s bodybuilding,
women’s physique, and figure competitors who are undersized for their
divisions. This strategy tends to produce more drastic looks suitable for divisions
that require a more extreme look. Do not run this peaking strategy unless you are
very lean. If you still have weight to lose, then you are better off going with one
of the physique management peaking strategies.
   This peaking strategy increases the size of muscles due to the
supercompensation effect; however, the more extreme nature of the strategy
means more risk. Generally, the more working parts of the peak week, and the
greater the fluctuations in carbs and sodium, the more chances there will be for
error. Practice this style of peaking before trying it for a real show.

Back-Load Peaking With Cleanup Day Protocol
Back-load peaking with a cleanup day works like a back-load peak, but it is a bit
more forgiving (figure 10.8). This method will also begin with a carbohydrate
deplete phase. As with the back-load peaking protocol, it is important to
understand that glycogen depletion is more effective as a carbohydrate deplete
and not a calorie deplete, and calories should be within 200 of contest prep
calories. Those who need to be a little leaner can set calories 200 under their
normal amounts, but if body fat is already acceptable, calories can be kept at the
same level or even slightly above. The amount of carbohydrates eaten during a
deplete phase depends largely on the individual, but most people need to deplete
with about 50 to 100 grams of carbohydrates per day. Be sure to allow protein
and fat intake to increase to reach the needed daily caloric intake.




Figure 10.8 Back-load with cleanup day peaking protocol.

   A deplete phase should not be too long or muscle may be lost, or you take the
chance that you may flatten out so much that glycogen levels cannot be refilled
by show day. Despite that risk, the deplete phase needs to be long enough (3-4
days) to fully deplete glycogen stores. After a full depletion, the carb-up should
begin on Tuesday or Wednesday and extend through Thursday. Building carbs
each day is an effective approach (if the increase is aggressive), although the
amount of carbohydrates that a person can tolerate varies.
   The primary difference between this peak week protocol and the back-load
peaking protocol is that, rather than continuing to build carbohydrates into the
show, on the day before the show, pull carbohydrate intake back a bit and clean
up any spilling that may have occurred. This way, you can take full advantage of
glycogen supercompensation while having a buffer day to fix any mistakes made
by carbing up too aggressively. Note, though, that when carbohydrates are
actively rising, your physique will look a bit fuller. You may see a bit more
fullness with a back-load peaking protocol, but the difference will be small.
   Protein and fat intakes should be higher during the deplete phase to bring the
day’s caloric intake up to where it needs to be, but during the loading days,
protein and fat intake should be slightly lower than their levels during contest
prep. Keep water intake high and consistent throughout the week, and changes in
sodium intake should follow the changes in carbohydrate intake.
   The back-load with cleanup day peaking protocol is best for men’s and
women’s bodybuilding, women’s physique, and figure competitors who are
undersized for their divisions. This protocol produces a more extreme look for
the divisions that require it. Beware, though; this protocol is not recommended
for those who still need to lose body fat. Those competitors should follow one of
the physique management peaking strategies.

Rapid Back-Load Peaking Protocol
The rapid back-load peaking strategy was developed in 2010 by the coauthor,
Cliff Wilson. When Cliff noticed the phenomenon that competitors tended to
look fuller and more extreme when carbohydrates were more drastically rising, it
seemed only natural to see whether the entire carb-up could be executed in a
single day to create the greatest possible fullness. Although this peaking strategy
can produce extreme results, it is extremely difficult to execute unless you know
exactly what you are doing.
   The rapid back-load peaking protocol is best for men’s and women’s
bodybuilding. This peaking strategy produces the most drastic look, so it is only
recommended for a bodybuilder. It is not appropriate for any other division.
   The protocol begins by slightly increasing carbohydrates over a one- or two-
day period (figure 10.9). The purpose of this is to avoid going into the deplete
phase too flat. You do not want to be fully carbed up to begin the deplete, but
you also do not want to be flat. A good guideline is having two days where carbs
and calories are like what you would do on your typical refeed days during
contest prep.
   After the two days of increased carbs, you will enter a four- to five-day
deplete phase. Four days of depleting is usually best, which would mean
depleting Monday-Thursday if the show is on Saturday. Remember that
glycogen depletion is the most effective when it is set up as a carbohydrate
deplete, not a calorie deplete. To set up a proper deplete, calories should be
within a 200-calorie range above or below what you were consuming while
dieting. If you feel you could be a little leaner, then place your intake 200
calories below your normal dieting amount. If you feel that you are lean enough,
then you can set them exactly where you have been dieting or even slightly
above.
   The amount of carbohydrates to eat during the depletion phase is specific to
the person, but most people need to deplete with carbohydrates in the range of
40 to 80 grams per day for a rapid back-load peak. After carbohydrate intake has
been set, protein and fat intakes should be increased to reach calorie goals for the
day.
   After the carbohydrate deplete phase, the carbohydrate-loading phase should
begin on the day before the show. The amount of carbohydrates that someone
should consume varies based on many factors. However, we have found that
most female competitors will do well consuming 4.8 to 6.5 grams of
carbohydrates per pound of body weight (10.56-14.3 g of carbohydrates per kg).
Most male competitors will do well consuming between 5.5 and 7.4 grams of
carbohydrates per pound (12.1-16.28 g per kg) of body weight. Some people
could fall outside of these ranges, but most people fall within them. When
deciding your carb-up amount, always err on the side of caution by starting
lower with your estimation.




Figure 10.9 Rapid back-load peaking protocol.

    We advise competitors to wake up early on carb-up day to begin eating. The
carbohydrate-loading requirements mean that many people should consume
between 700 to 1,300 grams of carbohydrates in a single day. Because the intake
is so high, waking up early allows the carbs to be spread more evenly across the
day without digestive distress. Consume faster-digesting carbohydrates earlier in
the day, and as the loading day progresses, transition to slower-digesting
carbohydrate sources.
    Water intake over the week during a rapid back-load should be consistently
high throughout the week, with only a slight increase on the carbohydrates
loading day. Sodium should similarly be kept consistently high throughout the
entire week. Most other peaking strategies do well to have sodium track upward
or downward with carbohydrates, but this peaking style is best with consistent
sodium levels with only a slight increase on the loading day.
    As mentioned, during the deplete phase, protein and fat intakes should be
higher to bring calorie levels where needed. During the load day, protein and fat
intake should be minimal. Protein and fat intake should be reserved to whatever
trace amounts are contained within the carbohydrate-loading foods you are
consuming that day.
    This peaking strategy is absolutely the most difficult one to execute. Because
all carbohydrate loading is done in one day, there is little margin for error. By
the time you can tell if you have carbed up properly, it is too late to change
anything. Practice this form of peaking before trying it in an actual show day
situation.


LEARNING YOUR LOAD LOOK
AND CHOOSING A PEAKING
STRATEGY
One final consideration when choosing a peak week strategy is something called
your load look. Cliff coined this phrase some time ago to describe how someone
looks while they are carb loaded and the day or so after they are carb loaded.
Some people tend to have a tight load look. This means that while they are in the
process of being carb loaded—and in the period after the load—they seem to
look sharper, and the skin looks more tightly wrapped around the muscle. Even
if they spill over slightly, the skin still may look tight. This is also usually
accompanied by a lot of vascularity. On the other hand, some people have a soft
load look. This means that when they are carb loading, they get blurry and soft
or possibly even bloated around the midsection. People with a soft load look
often find they stay blurry for a day or two and are sharpest about one to three
days after carb load.
   While we cannot claim to know with certainty the reason some people have
different load looks, we speculate that it is due to varied levels of insulin
sensitivity between individuals or that some people do not synthesize glycogen
as quickly as others. For people with a soft load look, glucose may be floating
around in the interstitial spaces for a while before being stored as muscle
glycogen (thereby drawing water and causing blurring).
   Regardless, learn your own individual load look before peak week. If you
have a tight load look, it would be better to have carbs coming up more
aggressively into show day. If you have a soft load look, it would be wise to
choose a peaking strategy where your more aggressive loading is finished one to
three days before the show. Knowing your load look helps you manage your
physique on show day, as we will cover in the Managing Your Physique on
Show Day section.


PEAK WEEK TRAINING
Competitors often incorrectly handle training during peak week. Typically,
during the final week, motivation is at an all-time high. The excitement of the
show usually results in energy and motivation levels that are higher than they
have been in months. As a result, many competitors tend to train much harder
during the final week. They lift heavier loads and perform a greater volume of
work.
   While this feels natural and good to lift more intensely when energy levels are
high, it is the opposite of what you would want during peak week. By the time
peak week has arrived, most of your hard work is over. At this stage, no new
muscle is built. While the primary goal with your training during contest prep is
to build and maintain muscle tissue, the goal during peak week shifts to
facilitating proper glycogen storage, allowing for better recovery, and ensuring
you are not sore on show day. Reducing the intensity and volume of training
during peak week can reduce inflammation and create a slightly sharper look.
   It may not feel particularly glamorous or exciting, but training during peak
week needs to be rather boring and uneventful. There are a variety of ways to
plan your training during peak week. Examples to follow for physique
management peaking protocols and glycogen supercompensation peaking
protocols are found in tables 10.2 and 10.3, respectively.
PEAK WEEK CARDIO
The cardio needed during peak week varies depending on the person. However,
much like peak week training, the goal should be to try and reduce the intensity
and duration of what you have been performing to allow for greater recovery. A
few guidelines include the following:
   ▶ Avoid high-intensity interval training (HIIT) cardio during the final week.
    This is too intense and can impede recovery.
   ▶ Aim to reduce current cardio levels and taper as the week progresses. If
    possible, try to minimize cardio in the final one or two days before the
    show.
   ▶ Do not do new types of cardio during peak week. Stick with familiar
    modes of cardio so that soreness is not an issue.
   ▶ Cardio may need to be higher on deplete days, but aim to not have it any
    higher than what was common during prep.


MANAGING YOUR PHYSIQUE ON
SHOW DAY
The big day is finally here! Maybe you nailed your peak week, maybe you did
not, or maybe you are close but could be better. Are there things you can do in
the final hours to make yourself better? Yes! Show-day nutrition often leads to
more questions than answers, however. Let us clarify what to do, starting with
the morning of the show.


Choose Your Food
Before show day arrives, plan what foods you need to eat to meet your
macronutrient requirements. We recommend avoiding high-residue foods—
foods higher in fiber and harder to digest—on show day. For example, this
means avoiding vegetables because they often do not digest very efficiently and
are more likely to cause bloating. Instead, eat light, easily digested foods that are
low in fiber.
   We also recommend keeping protein intake to just a few bites of chicken or
beef with each meal or a small protein shake with a meal or two. This is also to
avoid bloating on show day because protein is harder to digest. You do not need
protein on show day; it does not serve any purpose, so there is no sense in
forcing yourself to eat a lot of chicken, like you would on most other days.


Assess Your Physique
The first thing you need to do on show day is wake up early enough to assess
your physique. Competitors often wake up only a few hours before the show.
The big issue with this is that there is not enough time to create positive changes
for your physique. If you are just a little bit off with your peak, you will want
some time to correct the situation and get even better. The more certain you are
that you nail your peak, the later you can wake up. We recommend waking up
about six to six and a half hours before prejudging to assess your physique and
begin adjustments. If you are certain you will nail your peak, you can wake up
four to five hours before prejudging.


Get a Light Pump
After you have assessed your physique and determined if you are flat, spilled, or
spot on, we recommend you get in a light pump session at home or in the hotel
room. It does not need to be anything too involved; usually a light pump with
some resistance bands, along with some push-ups, will be plenty. The purpose of
this pump is twofold: it lets you see how you look with increased blood flow so
you can further assess your status (sometimes it can be hard to tell right after you
wake up), and it will facilitate improved glycogen storage of the carbohydrates
you will eat in the morning. Remember, on show day, time is of the essence
since carbs you eat do not convert to glycogen immediately. This pump should
only be about 15 to 20 minutes long. What you do after the pump will depend
largely on how you look.
If You Are Flat
If you woke up and are looking flat, it might be a good idea to start the day with
some sort of liquid carb source such as Gatorade or a glucose drink. The carbs
will get through your system and assimilate as quickly as possible. After that,
you should try to eat every hour or hour and a half with quickly digested carb
sources. You may also want to add a little sodium to help assimilate carbs.
During this process, check your physique often. Once you see yourself starting
to fill out, start slowing down your feeding. Carbs will not change your physique
immediately. Give it a few hours to start taking effect, and do not carb up too
aggressively. Remember that it is better to be a little flat rather than spilled.
    It is also important to recall what your specific load look is. If you are a bit
flat but have a soft load look, then you may be better off just leaving carbs
moderate for show day, focusing on bringing fats up to preserve what you have
and concentrating on staying tight rather than softening due to overzealous
carbing up. If you have a tight load look, then you are likely be able to carb up
more aggressively knowing that it only makes you tighter.
    Water on show day is simple. You should aim to drink about 12 ounces (355
mL) of water with each meal. You can drink more if you are thirsty. You need
water on show day to keep shuttling those carbs into your muscle tissue. You
should not let yourself get thirsty. However, on show day, there is no reason to
force water intake either.

If You Are Spilled
Hopefully you are not spilled on show day. We have said repeatedly that it is
better to be flat than spilled. However, in real life, spilling happens. If you wake
up and think you are a bit spilled, we recommend keeping food intake very low
or possibly even having no food after your pump. If you are spilled over, it is
because you have eaten too many carbohydrates the previous days. Therefore,
you do not want to add more to your system. Instead, you want to use the
glucose currently floating around in the subcutaneous areas.
   We recommend eating only one or two very small meals before stage time
and performing three or four small pump sessions in the hours before stage.
These small pump sessions will continue to use some excess glucose and
sharpen you up a bit before the stage. Typically, spilling over will take a day or
two to correct; however, this is something you can do to help the situation.
   Recommendations for water intake are the same as if you were flat; about 12
ounces (355 mL) with each meal (more if you are thirsty, but do not force it).

If You Are Spot On
If you wake up the morning of the show and look perfect, congrats! After your
pump session, you should eat a small meal of moderate-high carbohydrates, low
protein, and moderate fats. Do this every one and a half hours or so to maintain
your physique. Stick with easily digested whole-food carb sources and about 12
ounces (355 mL) of water with each meal. You can drink more if you are thirsty,
but there is no need to force water intake either.

The Final Minutes
In the final minutes before going on stage, there is still enough time to change
your physique. Here are a few tactics that can help you make some last-minute
improvements.
   ▶ Sodium: Sodium can enhance vascularity and a pump, which is a nice
    finishing touch to an already great-looking physique. About 45 to 60
    minutes before stage time, a timely dose of 500 to 2000 milligrams (about
    1/4-1 tsp of table salt) will work wonders for improving your pump and
    vascularity. Women, those in divisions requiring a less extreme look, and
    those with low sodium tolerance should stay on the lower end of that
    range.
   ▶ Caffeine: Caffeine will help with alertness on stage and ultimately just
    help you feel more energized, and it can also help you work up a bit of a
    sweat before the stage. People often tend to look a bit better after they
    have worked up a bit of a sweat.
   ▶ Sugar: Much like sodium, sugar enhances vascularity. Competitors once
    thought the key to vascularity was to drink red wine before the stage.
    However, there is nothing magical about red wine. The alcohol hitting the
    bloodstream caused veins to pop out. Any substance in the bloodstream
    causes increased vascularity. This means sodium, glucose, amino acids,
    alcohol, and so on will all cause your veins to protrude if they are flooding
    your bloodstream. We do not recommend using alcohol, but sodium and
    sugar are great choices. A quick dose of 20 to 50 grams of sugar about 20
    to 30 minutes before stage can have a big effect.
 FAQ: What if I mistime my sodium, sugar, and pump
 up backstage, and I am too early?
 Judging the timing of when you are going on stage exactly can be difficult. It
 is usually better to do everything early rather than late. If you find that you
 pumped up too early, this is OK. All you must do is stop pumping for a few
 minutes, and then you can simply pump again. This will not cause you to
 flatten out, assuming you carbed up properly.


THE PERFECT PEAK?
We need to bring it all together with the knowledge that peaking is truly a
combination of an art and science. Learning to peak properly is never as easy as
putting together a formula that will work the same way every time. Peaking
properly is not as simple as saying that a peak weak was a total success or a
complete failure. Most often, you will always leave each peak week feeling you
could have been fuller, tighter, bigger, and so on. Just remember that peaking is
an ever-evolving process. You learn something new each time you do it.
Experiment, practice, and always err on the side of conservatism come show
day. If you do this, you will find yourself getting better and better while leaving
others wondering what your secret is.

Take-Home Points
   ▶ To effectively peak, you must be lean!
   ▶ Carbohydrates, water, and sodium work together to create a full and tight
    look.
   ▶ Cutting out water while carbing up can cause blurring of definition and a
    softening of the physique.
   ▶ Removing sodium during peak week can cause spilling and a lack of
    pump.
   ▶ Many effective peaking strategies can be used to bring your best on show
    day.
   ▶ Peaking is a combination of an art and science and is perfected through a
    lot of trial and error.
                                                                            11
Contest Weekend: Strategizing for
Success



It does not matter what division you are competing in or the reasons you are
competing. You have spent years training to build the necessary muscle to
compete on a bodybuilding stage, and you have spent months dieting, training,
and doing your cardio to get lean enough. You have endured hunger, fatigue, and
deprivation to get to this day. You have made it further in this process than most
people could ever imagine. The day is yours to enjoy. Hopefully, you have also
had some extra carbohydrates during peak week to fill out a bit more in the days
leading up to the show. Show day is the time to reveal the result of your hard
work!


FOCUS ON WHAT YOU CAN
CONTROL
For first-time competitors, show day can be an incredibly stressful experience
filled with many unknowns. All competitors worry they may not place high.
However, contest placing is based on three factors: how you look, who else
shows up, and what the judges are looking for that day.
    You have no control over who else is competing that day. A person with a
high-level physique may win overall in one show and barely make top five in the
next show simply based on whom they are standing with onstage.
   In addition, what the judges are looking for may differ from one show to the
next or even between judges within the same show. A competitive class won by
a one-point decision may go the other way with a different judging panel.
   Rather than stressing about factors you cannot control, focus on the one thing
you have complete control over: how you look onstage. If you have applied the
advice provided in this book, you should be able to step onstage looking your
best.
   Show day can feel overwhelming, even for seasoned competitors who are in
their best shape ever. It can seem like there are so many details to keep straight.
To complicate things further, the details may differ from show to show. This
chapter will provide guidelines for show day so that you are prepared and can
approach the day relaxed.


THE DAY BEFORE THE SHOW
The to-do list of a competition typically begins on the day before the show.
Although each show schedule may differ, several appointments and meetings are
usually held the day before the show. Competitors who are traveling to a show
need to plan to arrive the day prior in most circumstances.


Check-In
To keep things running efficiently on show day, it is common to have a
competitor check-in the day prior. This is when a competitor picks up his or her
competitor number, drops off posing music, picks up a goodie bag (if provided
by the contest sponsors), and has a chance to ask the promoter any last-minute
questions.
   If information about class order or class size is not provided, we recommend
asking the promoter. Knowing the order of classes for show day can help you to
properly time your peak so you look your best when it is time to step onstage
with your class. It can also give you an idea of how much time you will have on
show day.


Tanning
There are many different tanning options for competitors. Those who choose to
be sprayed by a tanning service associated with the show will likely have an
appointment the day before the show to apply the first coat of tan. An additional
coat (or coats) will also be added on show day.
   Competitors who have fair skin and are doing their own tans should do a base
coat the day before the competition. In this situation, tan everything except your
hands, feet, and face. Once the tan has dried, sleep in an old pair of sweatpants
and a long-sleeved shirt to prevent smearing.
   If you stay in a hotel, be sure to bring your own sheets and towels. Most
tanning products rub off on the white sheets and towels provided by hotels. If
this occurs, they will charge you for the damage.


Grooming
The day before a competition is a good time to take care of any last-minute
grooming to save time on show day. This includes things like getting a haircut or
doing a final removal of body hair. Females competing in bikini or figure need
well-manicured nails.


Drug Testing
Drug-testing policies and procedures differ from show to show. However, most
drug-tested competitions perform at least a portion of the drug test the day
before competition. This may be a polygraph, urine test, or both. Urine samples
may also be collected from competitors on show day. Consult the competitor
information from your show for the drug-testing types and schedules at your
competition.


Packing Your Bag for Show Day
On show day, you will be able to bring a bag with you backstage. This should
include several items to help you to look your best onstage (see table 11.1).
Preparing this bag early helps reduce your stress on show day.

Essential Items
The must-haves in your show-day bag include everything you will wear onstage:
posing suit, shoes (for figure and bikini divisions), hair and makeup products,
tan and oil products, and jewelry (for figure and bikini divisions). Have your
food and water for the day to ensure that you stay on track with your peak plan.
Make sure to bring towels to clean up any mess you make with your tan and oil.
If your posing music was not collected at check-in, bring it with you on show
day. Even if your posing music has been collected before show day, bring a
backup copy.

Table 11.1 Show-Day Bag Items
ESSENTIAL ITEMS                             OPTIONAL ITEMS
Posing suit                                 Resistance bands (to pump up)
Shoes (for figure and bikini divisions)     Mirror
Tanning and oil (or glaze) products         Extra posing suit
Hair and makeup products (if necessary)     Scissors, superglue, or double-stick tape
Jewelry (for figure and bikini divisions)   Bikini Bite
Food                                        Space heater and extension cord
Water                                       Cell phone charger
Towels                                      Blanket and pillow
Posing music (including a backup copy)      Plastic cup (women)


Optional Items
Several other items may not be essential for show day but may be helpful to
have in your bag. Resistance bands to pump up are on the top of this list.
Although most shows have weights backstage for you to pump up with before
going out, equipment can be limited, and the pump-up area can be crowded. It is
much easier to bring along some of your own resistance bands to use. Similarly,
most shows have some mirrors backstage, but space in front of one can be
crowded, so it be can helpful to bring your own mirror if you have one.
    Plan for the worst when it comes to your suit. Things such as scissors,
superglue, and double-stick tape can avert a suit crisis. If you have an extra suit,
put it in your bag as a backup. Some competitors also find that the suit does not
fit or stick where they would like. Bikini Bite is necessary to stick your suit to
you to prevent any wardrobe malfunctions onstage.
    The remaining optional items are needed because you will likely be sitting
around and waiting a while on show day. Things such as a blanket and pillow to
get comfortable, a small space heater to stay warm (often it is cold backstage!),
and your cell phone charger may make the wait more pleasant. Finally, females
may want to consider bringing a plastic cup with a hole in the bottom for the
restroom so that you do not have to sit down and ruin your tan. It may be
advisable to put toilet paper in the bowl before going to the bathroom to prevent
water splatters that would ruin your tan.


SHOW DAY
The day has finally come! In this section we will cover a show day schedule that
is somewhat typical. However, there can be variations in the show day schedule
and timing, so be sure to consult your specific show information or ask the show
promoter any questions that you have so that you know what to expect.


Competitors Meeting
Contest day typically begins with a competitors meeting. During this meeting,
the show promoter will go over last-minute details, such as class order, number
of competitors in each class, expectations for posing and sportsmanship, and any
other last-minute information that competitors may need for the day.
   If competitors in bikini, figure, and men’s physique are not clear on the
expectations for the T-walk, ask the show promoter at this meeting. Each show
may do things a bit differently in the T-walk and individual presentation. Odds
are, other competitors have the same questions.


Preparation for the Stage
After the competitors meeting, there is time before the prejudging to finish
preparing for the stage. This is when you can finish your hair, makeup, and tan.
Before stepping onstage, apply a glaze or oil, based on the tanning product you
used.
   Also, be sure to take time to relax and meet other competitors. Although
competing can be stressful, and you will ultimately be compared against the
others, everyone backstage is in the same position. Other competitors will help
you out or answer your questions if you need something. Be sure to return the
favor if needed. Most competitors backstage are supportive of each other and
consequently have made several new friendships through competing.
   Before stepping onstage, you will also want to briefly pump. This helps
increase fluid in the muscle and results in looking larger and more vascular
onstage. In general, it is best to pump the upper body with light weights or
bands; for the lower body, stick to minimal pumping using just your body
weight. Competitors in divisions that require more muscularity and vascularity
need to pump more than those that do not. Additionally, competitors who are
borderline too big or too vascular for their division may want to back off on
pumping to not appear excessively muscular or vascular for the division.

 FAQ: How ready should I be when I arrive at the venue
 on show day?
 This is a hard question to answer because there is not a one-size-fits-all norm.
 It depends on how much time you have before your class, how much prep
 time you need, and your preferences. For example, a figure or bikini
 competitor who needs her hair, makeup, and tan done typically needs a good
 chunk of this completed before arriving at the venue, especially if her class is
 early in the show order. However, a men’s bodybuilder competing in one of
 the last classes at a large show can typically arrive with only a base coat of tan
 and have plenty of time. It will be best to get an idea of how much time you
 have in advance and plan your show day schedule to give yourself plenty of
 time to get ready.


Prejudging
Prejudging is when most judging is completed. During prejudging, competitors
come out onstage with the class. Competitors are positioned in a line and asked
to complete the mandatory poses for their division (see chapter 8).
   The judges often move competitors around the stage to make sure they can
compare certain competitors next to each other and allow everyone to get a fair
look. In general, being moved toward the middle of the stage is a good thing
because it means they are against the top competitors in the class. Being moved
away from the center is usually not a good thing, but this is not always the case
because several sanctions have moved away from this style of judging. Instead,
they move competitors around randomly onstage to allow each to get a fair look.
   In large classes, judges may do callouts to compare smaller groups of
competitors at a time. During callouts, the competitors being compared stand on
the judging line while the other competitors not in the callout will be off to the
back of the stage. If you are in the back of the stage, be sure to stay tight. Even if
the judges are not directly comparing you, assume their eyes are on you. In
general, the first callouts are the top competitors in the class; however, this is not
always the case.
   Some sanctions also have competitors perform T-walks during prejudging;
however, this may differ between sanctions and even shows within the same
sanction. Be sure to ask questions and be aware of what is required of your class
during prejudging if it is not clear.


 FAQ: Can I go out to eat after prejudging?
 After prejudging, most shows are done judging you. However, if you feel you
 may win your class, then you should not go out to eat because you may need
 to compete in the overall competition and will be judged against the other
 class winners. It is better to stay on your plan.
    We have seen situations where competitors were marked down due to
 looking significantly worse at night. When in doubt, stay consistent with your
 plan until after you come offstage at the night show.


Night Show
The night show is a much more relaxed atmosphere than prejudging. In general,
all the judging is done (aside from overalls) at that point. However, if a
competitor arrives at the night show looking significantly worse than at
prejudging, he or she may be moved down a few places. Stick with your meal
plan between shows, saving any treats until after the night show.
   During the night show, competitors typically do their posing routines and
receive their awards. In general, the crowd at the night show is larger. It is also
when competitors’ family and friends get to see them onstage since most
noncompetitors may not get much out of prejudging.
   Competitors who win divisions that have more than one class will also
compete in the overall at the night show. For example, if there are three open
bodybuilding classes, the winners of each of these classes will be compared, like
prejudging. Ultimately, the winner will be awarded the overall champion. In
larger pro qualifying competitions, the overall winner will also be awarded a pro
card.


Live Judging
Many shows are beginning to move away from the traditional style of prejudging
with a gap of downtime before the night show. Live-judged shows are becoming
more common and are meant to be friendlier for competitors and their families
and friends.
   During a live-judged show, a competitor’s class comes onstage for prejudging
as usual. However, following the class comparisons, competitors will
immediately perform their posing routines, during which time scores are tallied.
Following the posing routines, awards are handed out. Many competitors and
spectators who have experienced live-judged shows have positive things to say
about their experience. As a result, this show format is increasing in popularity
and the prevalence likely only increases; therefore, we felt it necessary to
mention it here so that competitors were prepared if they were to sign up for a
live-judged show.


AFTER THE SHOW
Most competitors go into the show with a great plan; however, few have a plan
in place for once the show wraps up. What you do at night after the show is
dictated by your goal moving forward. If you are transitioning into the off-
season, have an untracked meal out with the family and friends who came to
your show to celebrate a successful contest season. As long as this meal does not
become an all-out binge, you will be just fine. We cover the transition into the
off-season in more detail in the next chapter.
   However, if you plan to do another show within the next few weeks, you will
not have as much leeway in terms of what you can do after your show. In fact,
having a large untracked meal can significantly set you back in many cases. For
example, if you came into your first show about two pounds (1 kg) over where
you would ideally like to be, and your next show is in three weeks, eating a large
untracked meal and gaining five pounds (2 kg) will make you look worse the
next time you step onstage because it will require a faster ROL to be ready for
the next show. But if you continue with your meal plan and keep aiming for your
target ROL for the next three weeks, you will be at your best come show day. Do
not let the meal after your show ruin your chances of success at shows the rest of
your contest season. The food will still be there once you wrap up your last show
of the year.
   The stress and busyness of show day can cause it to go by all too quickly.
Throughout the weekend, take multiple breaks to stop, look around, and
appreciate all that you have accomplished to simply make it to the stage. You
have worked hard for this, so make sure you soak it all in and enjoy it.

Take-Home Points
   ▶ You likely need to arrive at your show the day prior, when things like
    competitor check-in and drug testing occur. The day before the show will
    also be a great time to tie up any loose ends to ensure you are organized
    for show day.
   ▶ On show day, arrive early to the competition venue for the competitors
    meeting. Following the meeting, you have some time to prepare for
    prejudging where most judging occurs. You typically do routines and
    receive awards at the night show.
   ▶ Each show may do things a bit differently, so consult the schedule and
    information provided by the show promoter for more information.
   ▶ If you have another show in the next couple of weeks, bingeing the night
    after your show can affect how you look at the next show. The amount of
    leeway you have after your show depends on how much time you have
    until your next show and how much additional body fat you need to lose
    before then.
                                                                              12
After the Event: Recovery and
Recommendations



The show is over, the tan has faded, and you are back to your normal daily
routine. Where do you go next?
    Unsurprisingly, many competitors struggle with this. After you put so much
effort into preparing for a competition, it can feel like a large void once the show
is over. Often, there is also confusion as to what you should be doing during this
time.
    This chapter outlines how to handle the period after the show and the
subsequent off-season to set yourself up for an improved physique the next time
you step onstage.


POSTSHOW ANALYSIS
There is always a great deal of emotion surrounding a show. The process was
long and grueling, and the show weekend was undoubtedly taxing and filled
with emotional highs and lows. This leads many competitors to ignore a most
important part of the postshow period, which is an analysis of what took place.
Remember that each show you compete in is not only an accomplishment but
also a learning experience. Successes and failures all serve as valuable learning
tools.
   After each show, make notes on what worked well and did not work well
during your prep and what you did and did not do well along the way. For
example, if you found a meal timing schedule that seemed to work well for you,
note it. If you needed to get leaner, note it. If you realized training in the
morning did not work well for you, make sure you note it. It is easy to say that
you will remember these things later, but it is not as easy as you think to
remember so many details.
   Over the course of many shows, you can improve each prep. You can keep
doing the things that work and change the things that do not. If you are
purposeful about this, you will find ways to fine-tune the process. This analysis
is one of those small things that turns average competitors into seasoned
veterans.


COMPETING IN MULTIPLE
SHOWS
We strongly recommend competing in multiple shows while stage-lean. Dieting
for a show is extremely difficult and time-consuming. If you use the approaches
we have outlined in this book, there will likely be a significant amount of time
that you are not stage-lean between contest seasons. Doing multiple shows while
stage-lean makes the most of the hard work you have put in during contest prep.
   Many competitors attempt to do multiple competitions in a year by competing
in the spring, again in the summer, and once again in the fall. Then they start
right back again the following spring. However, this is not an optimal way to
compete in multiple shows because it significantly increases the amount of time
you are stage-lean, when hormone levels are less than ideal. It also limits the
time you are able to spend out of a caloric deficit and above stage-lean levels of
body fat. Ultimately, this cuts into progress long term.
   Instead, we recommend competing in multiple competitions within a shorter
time frame (usually around one to three months). This limits the time you need
to stay stage-lean. It also maximizes the time spent in the off-season making
progress while still allowing you to step onstage multiple times in a contest
season.
   As we noted in the previous chapter, those competing in multiple shows
within a short time should not binge after the first competition because doing so
adds unnecessary body fat. When you must diet off that regained body fat, you
can lose additional muscle.
   What you do between shows depends on your situation. If you still have more
weight to lose heading into your next show, you need to hop back on your plan
the day after your show and continue to shoot for loss. But if you were as lean as
you needed to be for your first show, you need to start increasing intake and
pulling back cardio to ensure you do not start dieting away muscle. You should
aim for your current maintenance intake during this time since additional body
fat loss is not necessary. Your current maintenance when stage-lean is lower
than your maintenance at the start of prep.


PHYSIOLOGY OF BEING STAGE-
LEAN
It is often said that being stage-lean looks awesome but feels terrible. This is due
in part to the number of physiological changes that occur during contest prep.
Before discussing what to do as you transition into the off-season, understand
the state your body is in when you are stage-lean as you come out of your
contest season. If you are drug-free and stage-lean, the following apply to you.
   ▶ Reduced testosterone levels. A 70 percent reduction (or more) in
    testosterone is observed in natural male bodybuilders during contest prep
    (6). Testosterone likely also decreases in females; however, since
    testosterone is lower initially, it does not have as large of an effect on
    muscle retention during contest prep. Interestingly, this may be one reason
    drug-free males anecdotally lose more muscle mass and strength during
    contest prep than drug-free females do. Regardless, significantly reduced
    testosterone levels have a detrimental effect on muscle size and strength
    gain. Fortunately, testosterone levels normalize once body fat is gained
    after a contest.
   ▶ Menstrual cycle abnormalities. Many women lose their menstrual cycles
    due to low caloric intake, high physical activity, extremely lean body
    composition, and abnormalities in hormone levels that occur during
    contest prep. Typically, normal menstrual cycles return once caloric intake
    and body fat begin to increase; however, it could take up to a year after a
    contest to regain a normal menstrual cycle (4). It may be unavoidable for a
    woman to lose her cycle to reach stage-lean levels of body fat. However,
    an effort should be made to have a normal menstrual cycle most of the
    time to avoid negative health consequences, such as bone loss and
    increased uterine cancer risk. This may mean a longer off-season is
    necessary for some women.
   ▶ Reduced metabolic rate. Metabolic rate is reduced during contest prep for
    several reasons, including decreased lean mass, decreased food intake,
    reduced nonexercise activity, decreased hormones, increased
    mitochondrial efficiency, and increased gut microbe extraction (5, 6, 8).
    For these reasons, plateaus in weight loss commonly occur during contest
    prep. The number of calories a person can consume to maintain weight
    will be reduced from the start of contest prep. However, metabolic rate
    also normalizes once caloric intake increases and body fat is gained.
   ▶ Increased hunger. Hormones that make you feel hungry (such as ghrelin)
    increase, while hormones that make you feel full (such as leptin) decrease
    during contest prep (6). Combine increased hunger with a reduced
    metabolic rate, and a competitor is set up for rapid weight regain.
    However, much like the other physiological changes discussed above,
    hunger hormones regulate when body fat percentage increases after a
    contest.
   Remaining stage-lean in the long term can result in negative health
consequences and significantly less physique progress since this physiological
state is not conducive to muscle gain. If anything, you likely lose muscle over
time due to low hormone levels. Therefore, you need to gain body fat after a
competition to maximize progress during the off-season and in subsequent
contest preps. And it will be important for your long-term health.


TRANSITIONING TO THE OFF-
SEASON
An effective transition to the off-season requires attention the immediate few
days after a show as well as the weeks or months until the next show. After a
few untracked meals, bingeing should be avoided, and a competitor should look
at an initial body fat regain and the overall off-season weight gain.
Bingeing
The worst way to handle the postshow period is to binge. If your final contest of
the season is on a Saturday, we recommend enjoying some untracked food
Saturday night and Sunday as long as it does not become an all-out binge.
However, it is important to get back to some type of plan and consistency by
Monday.
   When Monday arrives, many people go back to what they were doing before
starting contest prep. They either drastically increase caloric intake or just stop
tracking intake altogether. At the same time, they drop cardio from several
sessions weekly to none. Also, resistance training intensity and frequency may
drop because they no longer have an immediate goal to train for.
   The result of this approach is rapid weight and fat gain (2). In fact, a study of
drug-free competitors found that most weight gained in the initial months after a
contest is body fat (7). This means drug-free athletes are not “primed for muscle
growth” as many believe and instead are primed for fat gain after a contest.
   While fat gain is necessary following your show, rapid fat gain is not best for
long-term progress. In some cases, weight gain may not stabilize until the person
is at a higher body fat percentage than before starting contest prep. This is
known as body fat overshooting (1).
   After a competitor rapidly regains body fat, the first reaction is often to start
dieting again. However, evidence from case studies of drug-free bodybuilders
suggests that hormone levels and metabolic rate take time to normalize when
body fat is regained after a contest (6). Moreover, there is some evidence that
those who binge after a show do not see hormone normalization as quickly as
those with more controlled weight gain (7). This means that if the person rapidly
gains weight after the show and then immediately diets, he or she most likely
requires a combination of lower calories and more cardio to reach a leaner body
composition than what was needed during contest prep. Pushing caloric intake
low and cardio high so quickly after a long contest prep period will likely only
lower hormone levels and metabolic rate further. The result is an increased
susceptibility to rapidly regaining body fat and increases the chance that you
binge again. Avoid this cycle of bingeing and restricting.
   If you have difficulty with bingeing postshow, we recommend that you
consult with a qualified therapist who specializes in disordered eating patterns.
Initial Body Fat Regain
If you reached true stage-lean levels of body fat, you likely experienced several
negative effects on hormone levels, energy, strength, muscle mass, metabolic
rate, mood, and your relationship with food. Prolonging the amount of time in
this state is not necessary: It may impact rate of progress in the off-season and
may even be detrimental to long-term health.
   The rate at which you aim to gain weight back after a competition depends on
your situation. For example, if you struggled to stay consistent with your
nutrition plan at the end of contest prep, pushing intake up faster and gaining a
bit quicker may not be a bad idea. This allows you to find a middle ground
where you can stay consistent and likely results in less rapid weight regain
versus trying to follow an unsustainable plan and bingeing. On the other hand, if
you did not truly get stage-lean and did not experience as many negative effects
of being stage-lean, you may want to regain weight a bit slower since the amount
of weight you will need to regain to feel more normal will be less. This would
allow you to start your off-season (and hopefully your next contest prep) with a
leaner body composition to help increase the chance you will be lean enough the
next time you step onstage.
   Pushing for quicker weight gain initially to add back body fat sooner may
help normalize some of the negative effects of being stage-lean. However, do
this in a controlled manner and not with an all-out binge. Once you are starting
to feel more normal, slow the rate of gain to prevent excess body fat gain in the
off-season so that you do not need to diet as soon or end up excessively above
stage weight.
   Some people struggle to see their contest body slowly disappearing as they
add back body fat after the show. Although you need to regain body fat, in this
case, gaining more slowly may be beneficial for motivation levels and
psychological health. However, if you find that you are mentally struggling with
postshow weight gain, reach out to a counselor specializing in disordered eating
and body image.
   Your target gain rate after the show ranges from 0.5 to 2 pounds (0.2-1 kg)
weekly until you feel things are starting to normalize. For you, that point could
be anywhere between 5 and 20 pounds (2-9 kg) over stage weight, depending on
which division you competed in, how lean you were at your competition, your
genetics, and other factors. This period can take one to three months and maybe
more. However, we advise keeping a quicker rate of gain initially until you start
to feel more normal, paying attention to factors such as your hunger, focus,
energy, strength, sex drive, and sleep quality.
   There is no single “best” way for everyone to increase intake initially after the
show. In general, it is a good idea to initially increase your intake up to around
(or just above) your current maintenance level, keeping in mind that your current
maintenance is lower than your maintenance at the start of contest prep. Reduce
cardio about 30 to 50 percent initially to help get you out of an energy deficit
and around (or just above) your current maintenance.
   From there, continue adjusting caloric intake up and cardio down to maintain
your target rate of gain in the initial weeks postshow until you have gained
enough body fat that you start to feel more normal again. If you are not gaining
weight coming out of a show, larger increases may be necessary to make sure
you start gaining sooner rather than later to avoid staying stage-lean long-term.


Off-Season Weight Gain
After you reach a more sustainable body composition, where hormones,
strength, metabolic rate, and your overall feeling of “normal” start to return, you
need to slow your rate of gain to prevent excessive fat gain and allow yourself to
stay out of a deficit for a prolonged period. A larger caloric surplus and faster
rate of gain will not result in more muscle gain. It only results in more body fat
gain (3). For this reason, after an initial gain, we recommend the monthly gain
rate slow to one pound (0.5 kg) at the most or two pounds (0.9 kg) for younger
competitors newer to the sport. Drug-free females may even want to aim for a
slower gain per month.
   Where you allow your weight to drift in the off-season depends on many
factors. As with most things in this sport, it is not one-size-fits-all. Most people
have a range of weight where they can sit comfortably. Going below this range
takes restraint and may result in detrimental effects to hormones and other body
processes, as previously discussed. On the other hand, venturing above this
range often requires force-feeding and results in excessive fat gain (thereby
leading to a more difficult prep the next time). An ideal amount of gain for a
competitor allows him or her to sit somewhere within this comfortable weight
range during the off-season.
 FAQ: Does everyone need to regain body fat after a
 show?
 For most competitors, weight gain after the contest will be necessary. If you
 truly got stage-lean, you need to gain weight after the show (discussed in
 detail previously). Your plan should include a quick increase in intake and
 decrease in cardio to allow you to gain and return to a more sustainable body
 fat percentage.
     However, someone who does not get stage-lean may not need to gain a lot
 of weight. As we mentioned earlier, if you are not ready for a show, our
 recommendation would be to pick a later show to give yourself more time.
 But if that is not possible and you step onstage with at least 10 to 15 pounds
 (4-7 kg) to lose, you may still be at a body fat percentage that is healthy and
 sustainable (or at least not far away from it). This means the amount of weight
 you need to gain back is less than the competitor who did get stage-lean.
     One common mistake competitors make is not getting stage-lean but still
 treating the postshow period as if they had. This results in unnecessary weight
 gain and increases the chances they will not get stage-lean the next time
 around.

   Competitors who have been stage-lean know that when they get close to
stage-lean, the amount of time thinking about food significantly increases. Meals
become much more elaborate and time-intensive, and a person may try to milk
everything he or she can out of a limited intake. This relationship with food is
not necessarily normal, and there should be an effort in the off-season to
establish a healthier relationship with food, where you are not as food-focused.
Allowing body weight and body fat to come up to a level that results in you not
being food-focused is important for long-term psychological health.
   In addition, younger competitors who have not been training as long have a
greater capacity for growth because their hormone levels are closer to optimal,
and they are further from their genetic ceiling. Often, they also have a faster
metabolic rate, which makes dieting down for shows easier. As a result, a
younger competitor can let his or her weight drift up a bit more to take
advantage of a prime growing period, while an older competitor may be better
staying a bit closer to stage weight.
   Males have a greater capacity for muscle growth than females do because of
higher levels of anabolic hormones such as testosterone. In addition, males tend
to have a higher metabolic rate due to higher body mass and muscle mass.
Therefore, a female competitor may want to stay a bit closer to stage-lean than
her male counterpart does.
   Consider your level of conditioning at your last competition, the length of
your off-season, and how easily you get stage-lean when you are determining
what your weight should be. People who still had a good amount of weight to
lose at their last show need to gain less weight in the off-season than competitors
with striations in their glutes and veins in their hamstrings do. The division you
compete in may play a role as well, because conditioning does not have to be as
high in bikini as in bodybuilding. This means that a bikini competitor will
typically not have to gain as much weight in the off-season as a bodybuilder
does, even if both reached the conditioning standards of their division at their
competition. If your off-season is short or you have difficulty losing weight, it
may be advisable to stay a bit closer to stage weight.
   A primary goal of an off-season is to add muscle and improve your physique
before your next competition. Staying stage-lean, or close to it, will result in
strength levels remaining low, thereby reducing the amount of muscle mass you
can gain. In general, it is a good idea to let weight increase to a point where
strength is high to maximize progress. However, you will reach diminished
returns, where you are not seeing additional strength gain for the weight you are
adding. This is a signal that you should not allow your weight to increase further
above stage weight in the off-season.
   It is also important to address the psychological effects of weight regain.
Psychological disorders are common among physique competitors and should be
addressed with a professional before dieting down for a competition. Dieting
down for a show will usually only amplify preexisting issues with food, exercise,
and body image. Even in competitors without signs of preexisting psychological
disorders, contest prep may bring some of these issues to the surface. As a result,
some people may struggle more with weight gain after a show than others do.
This does not mean that they should stay stage-lean, but they may want to slow
the rate at which they regain weight or stay a bit closer to stage-lean, provided
that they gain enough to normalize things hormonally and metabolically. If you
struggle with weight gain after the contest, we recommend consulting a
professional to work through things before jumping back into contest prep.
   As you may expect, there is no off-season weight gain amount ideal for
everyone. Optimal off-season weight gain depends on the factors we discussed.
Some competitors may only need to regain 5 to 10 pounds (2-5 kg), while others
may be best off gaining more than 30 pounds (more than 14 kg) during their off-
season.
   You should aim to gain enough weight back that you feel normal and are
gaining strength at a weight you can hold without feeling restricted about food.
However, you also want to not get excessively far over stage-lean to avoid
having to lose an excessive amount of body fat during your next contest prep.
While you can always run a short cut, typically referred to as a mini cut, to lean
out a bit in the off-season, the most time should be spent both at a sustainable
body fat percentage and out of a deficit during your off-season without getting
excessively far over stage weight.
   Each time you diet down for a contest season, your goal should be to look
better than the previous contest season. While most people put a greater amount
of effort and focus into their contest prep, that is not the time you will make
most of your improvements. Once you have mastered the art of the contest prep,
you make true progress in the off-season. So, give this special time the attention,
focus, and effort it truly deserves.

Take-Home Points
   ▶ Assess your physique following your competition to ensure you create an
    off-season plan that results in an improved physique the next time you step
    onstage.
   ▶ If you do multiple shows within the same contest season, do them over a
    one- to three-month period. Be consistent with your nutrition plan
    postshow and do not binge, especially if you have another show within a
    few weeks.
   ▶ If you struggle in any way with bingeing or body image associated with
    weight regain following a competition, we encourage you to reach out to a
    counselor specialized in body image and disordered eating patterns.
   ▶ Many factors affect how quickly you gain weight postshow and how high
    you allow your weight to drift in the off-season. However, if you reached
    stage-lean levels of body fat, you need to gain weight back after your
 show.
▶ There is no amount of off-season weight gain that is ideal for everyone!
EPILOGUE

Competitive bodybuilding is an incredibly difficult sport that few people have
the dedication to endure. While many people take diet and training seriously,
few have the mental and physical fortitude to tackle what is required to get on
stage. Athletes in other sports train hard and then go home to mentally and
physically relax, but competitive bodybuilders must remain dedicated
throughout every resistance training and cardio session, each meal, and every
night when they are having difficulty falling asleep because they are hungry.
There is no reprieve from the demands of such a life. Our minds and bodies are
called to remember our task nearly every moment.
    When most of us enter the sport, we do so with only dreams of what we will
look like one day. We visualize chiseled abs, mountainous biceps, and capped
delts that we will be proud of. In our zeal to achieve this ideal body we want so
much, we resolve to do “whatever it takes” to get where we aim to be. This
mindset has built many champions over the years. However, this mentality has
also led many athletes, not just bodybuilders, to their ultimate failure.
    The problem with doing whatever it takes to win is that many people often do
not take the time to identify what is required to accomplish that. Blind hard work
is never the answer. In bodybuilding, that mindset is often applauded, even when
people are completely off base. Yet, blind hard work will not put them any
closer to their goals. If a marathon runner were to run 35 miles in the wrong
direction rather than the required 26.2 miles on a race course, he or she would
have worked harder (ran farther) than fellow racers yet lost the race. Put forth
significant effort but always assess if the effort is necessary, useful, and specific
to your goal.
    Even after we remove all unnecessary, useless, or vague effort, what we are
left with in the bodybuilding journey is simply difficult beyond measure. In this
sport, we must demand more of ourselves than anyone else would ever demand
from us and expect more of ourselves than others would ever expect from us.
The fastest route to mediocrity is to only meet the standards that others set for
us. The grueling nature of bodybuilding itself, particularly contest prep, tends to
attract those who want to test themselves against the challenge and achieve a
body that others simply cannot.
    In this sport, we derive joy from our results. Who among us does not delight
in looking in the mirror and seeing the fruits of our labor or experiencing the
feeling of winning a big show? It feels good to work for something and then see
it pay off. However, what will keep you going when progress slows down (and it
will), when you have a bad placing at a show (and you will), or when the
timetable to reach your goals seems like it will take years rather than weeks
(because it does)? Do you have it in you to keep going? For many, the answer is
no.
    Bodybuilders tend to look to the future with rose-colored glasses. They
project forward and think, “I’ll be happier when I’m bigger and leaner.” Or, “I’ll
be happy when I win that show.” This attitude places the entirety of one’s
happiness on the result. This leads to an almost desperate mentality to get results
in which every ounce of short-term progress takes on momentous importance.
    Ironically, to achieve happiness through results and achievement, the process
usually becomes a source of despair and desperation. Once that sets in, each
personal record in the gym and each show placing is viewed as a live-or-die
situation. The problem is that in bodybuilding, you lose far more shows than you
win, and beyond the first five years of training, personal records in the gym will
become rare. Adopting a live-or-die mentality means that you die over and over.
    Rather than living and dying with every success and failure, learn to enjoy the
successes, learn from the failures, and move on. Success and failure are only
temporary states. Each success only lasts until our next failure, and each failure
only lasts until our next success. For this reason, we should not get caught up in
any single instance of either type. We enjoy, we learn, and we move on.
    This arduous process makes bodybuilding so intolerable and yet so beautiful.
Competitors who get to the competitive arena often only last about three to four
years before they eventually quit. It wears on them so greatly that they cannot
sustain the process long. The sad part is that achieving one’s personal best in
bodybuilding takes longer than just a few years; it usually takes a decade or
more. So what separates those who can last from those who cannot? What is that
secret ingredient that allows some to endure while others flame out?
    The answer to these questions is simple. The key to enduring all the hardships
in this sport over the long haul is enjoyment. The result of the bodybuilding
process cannot and must not be the only source of our joy. We must learn to
derive joy from the process itself if we wish to last. True happiness does not
come from any single thing, even bodybuilding results; it comes from having an
abundance of sources of joy in our lives. Bodybuilding must add to life’s total
joy. If it does not do that, then we cannot be expected to have the will to
continue doing it.
   If everything you do in this sport is viewed as something to “simply endure”
to reach an end goal that will be your only source of joy, you will be miserable.
Successful people do not live through sacrifice. They live through passion. You
must love what you do, not just the result of what you do. There is a clear
difference between the person who continues for two decades and the person
who continues for only two years. The former will wake up most days for two
decades and be excited for what he or she gets to do that day, but the latter will
wake up every day for two years excited for what he or she hopes to accomplish
someday, yet dreads what must be done to get it.
   In the end, bodybuilding can be an incredibly powerful positive force in the
lives of those who take up the challenge. It tests us our will, teaches us our
power, and has the ability to make us better, both mentally and physically. The
reasons we started in this sport are rarely the reasons we stay. The improvements
we make are rarely what we envisioned at the outset, but they are a source of
more pride than we ever could have imagined. As you progress along your
journey, you must work hard, test your limits, and give every ounce of energy to
achieve your full potential. Always remember, though, to enjoy the privilege,
benefits, and beauty that this sport has to offer, because they are plentiful.
REFERENCES

CHAPTER 1
1.   Bamman, MM, Hunter, GR, Newton, LE, Roney, RK, and Khaled, MA. Changes in body
     composition, diet, and strength of bodybuilders during the 12 weeks prior to competition. J Sports
     Med Phys Fitness 33:383-391, 1993.
2.   Helms, ER, Aragon, AA, and Fitschen, PJ. Evidence-based recommendations for natural
     bodybuilding contest preparation: nutrition and supplementation. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:20, 2014.
3.   Helms, ER, Fitschen, PJ, Aragon, AA, Cronin, J, and Schoenfeld, BJ. Recommendations for natural
     bodybuilding contest preparation: resistance and cardiovascular training. J Sports Med Phys Fitness
     55:164-178, 2015.
4.   Kleiner, SM, Bazzarre, TL, and Litchford, MD. Metabolic profiles, diet, and health practices of
     championship male and female bodybuilders. J Am Diet Assoc 90:962-967, 1990.
5.   Steen, SN. Precontest strategies of a male bodybuilder. Int J Sport Nutr 1:69-78, 1991.
6.   Trexler, ET, Hirsch, KR, Campbell, BI, and Smith-Ryan, AE. Physiological changes following
     competition in male and female physique athletes: a pilot study. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
     27:458-466, 2017.
7.   van der Ploeg, GE, Brooks, AG, Withers, RT, Dollman, J, Leaney, F, and Chatterton, BE. Body
     composition changes in female bodybuilders during preparation for competition. Eur J Clin Nutr
     55:268-277, 2001.



CHAPTER 4
1.   Hubal, MJ, Gordish-Dressman, H, Thompson, PD, Price, TB, Hoffman, EP, Angelopoulos, TJ,
     Gordon, PM, Moyna, NM, Pescatello, LS, Visich, PS, Zoeller, RF, Seip, RL, and Clarkson, PM.
     Variability in muscle size and strength gain after unilateral resistance training. Med Sci Sports Exerc
     37:964-972, 2005.
2.   Pardue, A, Trexler, ET, and Sprod, LK. Case study: unfavorable but transient physiological changes
     during contest preparation in a drug-free male bodybuilder. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 27:550-
     559, 2017.
3.   Rossow, LM, Fukuda, DH, Fahs, CA, Loenneke, JP, and Stout, JR. Natural bodybuilding
     competition preparation and recovery: a 12-month case study. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 8:582-
     592, 2013.
CHAPTER 5
1.   Azizi, F. Effect of dietary composition on fasting-induced changes in serum thyroid hormones and
     thyrotropin. Metabolism 27:935-942, 1978.
2.   Bhasin, S, Storer, TW, Berman, N, Callegari, C, Clevenger, B, Phillips, J, Bunnell, TJ, Tricker, R,
     Shirazi, A, and Casaburi, R. The effects of supraphysiologic doses of testosterone on muscle size
     and strength in normal men. N Engl J Med 335:1-7, 1996.
3.   Burke, LM, Loucks, AB, and Broad, N. Energy and carbohydrate for training and recovery. J Sports
     Sci 24:675-685, 2006.
4.   Byrne, NM, Sainsbury, A, King, NA, Hills, AP, and Wood, RE. Intermittent energy restriction
     improves weight loss efficiency in obese men: the MATADOR study. Int J Obes (Lond) 42:129-
     138, 2018.
5.   Chaston, TB, Dixon, JB, and O’Brien, PE. Changes in fat-free mass during significant weight loss: a
     systematic review. Int J Obes (Lond) 31:743-750, 2007.
6.   Garthe, I, Raastad, T, Refsnes, PE, Koivisto, A, and Sundgot-Borgen, J. Effect of two different
     weight-loss rates on body composition and strength and power-related performance in elite athletes.
     Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 21:97-104, 2011.
7.   Halliday, TM, Loenneke, JP, and Davy, BM. Dietary intake, body composition, and menstrual cycle
     changes during competition preparation and recovery in a drug-free figure competitor: a case study.
     Nutrients 8:740, 2016.
8.   Helms, ER, Aragon, AA, and Fitschen, PJ. Evidence-based recommendations for natural
     bodybuilding contest preparation: nutrition and supplementation. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:20, 2014.
9.   Kistler, BM, Fitschen, PJ, Ranadive, SM, Fernhall, B, and Wilund, KR. Case study: natural
     bodybuilding contest preparation. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 24:694-700, 2014.
10. Knuth, ND, Johannsen, DL, Tamboli, RA, Marks-Shulman, PA, Huizenga, R, Chen, KY, Abumrad,
    NN, Ravussin, E, and Hall, KD. Metabolic adaptation following massive weight loss is related to the
    degree of energy imbalance and changes in circulating leptin. Obesity (Silver Spring) 22:2563-2569,
    2014.
11. Kreitzman, SN, Coxon, AY, and Szaz, KF. Glycogen storage: illusions of easy weight loss,
    excessive weight regain, and distortions in estimates of body composition. Am J Clin Nutr 56:292S-
    293S, 1992.
12. Robinson, SL, Lambeth-Mansell, A, Gillibrand, G, Smith-Ryan, A, and Bannock, L. A nutrition and
    conditioning intervention for natural bodybuilding contest preparation: case study. J Int Soc Sports
    Nutr 12:20, 2015.
13. Rodriguez, NR, DiMarco, NM, and Langley, S. American College of Sports Medicine position
    stand. Nutrition and athletic performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 41:709-731, 2009.
14. Romon, M, Lebel, P, Velly, C, Marecaux, N, Fruchart, JC, and Dallongeville, J. Leptin response to
    carbohydrate or fat meal and association with subsequent satiety and energy intake. Am J Physiol
    277:E855-861, 1999.
15. Rossow, LM, Fukuda, DH, Fahs, CA, Loenneke, JP, and Stout, JR. Natural bodybuilding
    competition preparation and recovery: a 12-month case study. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 8:582-
    592, 2013.
16. Trexler, ET, Hirsch, KR, Campbell, BI, and Smith-Ryan, AE. Physiological changes following
    competition in male and female physique athletes: a pilot study. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
    27:458-466, 2017.
17. Trexler, ET, Smith-Ryan, AE, and Norton, LE. Metabolic adaptation to weight loss: implications for
    the athlete. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:7, 2014.
18. Wing, RR and Jeffery, RW. Prescribed “breaks” as a means to disrupt weight control efforts. Obes
    Res 11:287-291, 2003.



CHAPTER 6
1.   Abargouei, AS, Janghorbani, M, Salehi-Marzijarani, M, and Esmaillzadeh, A. Effect of dairy
     consumption on weight and body composition in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
     randomized controlled clinical trials. Int J Obes (Lond) 36:1485-1493, 2012.
2.   Anderson, JW, Baird, P, Davis, RH, Jr., Ferreri, S, Knudtson, M, Koraym, A, Waters, V, and
     Williams, CL. Health benefits of dietary fiber. Nutr Rev 67:188-205, 2009.
3.   Antonio, J and Ellerbroek, A. Case reports on well-trained bodybuilders: two years on a high-protein
     diet. J Ex Physiol 21:14-24, 2018.
4.   Antonio, J, Ellerbroek, A, Silver, T, Vargas, L, Tamayo, A, Buehn, R, and Peacock, C. A high-
     protein diet has no harmful effects: a one-year crossover study in resistance-trained males J Nutr
     Metab 2016. [e-pub ahead of print].
5.   Azizi, F. Effect of dietary composition on fasting-induced changes in serum thyroid hormones and
     thyrotropin. Metabolism 27:935-942, 1978.
6.   Bandegan, A, Courtney-Martin, G, Rafii, M, Pencharz, PB, and Lemon, PW. Indicator amino acid-
     derived estimate of dietary protein requirement for male bodybuilders on a nontraining day is
     several-fold greater than the current recommended dietary allowance. J Nutr 147:850-857, 2017.
7.   Bantle, JP, Raatz, SK, Thomas, W, and Georgopoulos, A. Effects of dietary fructose on plasma
     lipids in healthy subjects. Am J Clin Nutr 72:1128-1134, 2000.
8.   Bohe, J, Low, JF, Wolfe, RR, and Rennie, MJ. Latency and duration of stimulation of human
     muscle protein synthesis during continuous infusion of amino acids. J Physiol 532:575-579, 2001.
9.   Bray, GA, Most, M, Rood, J, Redmann, S, and Smith, SR. Hormonal responses to a fast-food meal
     compared with nutritionally comparable meals of different composition. Ann Nutr Metab 51:163-
     171, 2007.
10. Byrne, NM, Sainsbury, A, King, NA, Hills, AP, and Wood, RE. Intermittent energy restriction
    improves weight loss efficiency in obese men: the MATADOR study. Int J Obes (Lond) 42:129-
    138, 2018.
11. Cameron, JD, Cyr, MJ, and Doucet, E. Increased meal frequency does not promote greater weight
    loss in subjects who were prescribed an 8-week equi-energetic energy-restricted diet. Br J Nutr
    103:1098-1101, 2010.
12. Campbell, BI, Aguilar, D, Conlin, L, Vargas, A, Schoenfeld, BJ, Corson, A, Gai, C, Best, S, Galvan,
    E, and Couvillion, K. Effects of high vs. low protein intake on body composition and maximal
    strength in aspiring female physique athletes engaging in an 8-week resistance training program. Int
    J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 1-21, 2018.
13. Champagne, CM, Bray, GA, Kurtz, AA, Monteiro, JB, Tucker, E, Volaufova, J, and Delany, JP.
    Energy intake and energy expenditure: a controlled study comparing dietitians and non-dietitians. J
    Am Diet Assoc 102:1428-1432, 2002.
14. de Souza, RJ, Mente, A, Maroleanu, A, Cozma, AI, Ha, V, Kishibe, T, Uleryk, E, Budylowski, P,
    Schunemann, H, Beyene, J, and Anand, SS. Intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fatty acids and
    risk of all cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-
    analysis of observational studies. BMJ 351:h3978, 2015.
15. Ferraro, R, Lillioja, S, Fontvieille, AM, Rising, R, Bogardus, C, and Ravussin, E. Lower sedentary
    metabolic rate in women compared with men. J Clin Invest 90:780-784, 1992.
16. Haff, GG, Stone, MH, Warren, BJ, Keith, R, Johnson, RL, Nieman, DC, Williams, F, and Kirksey,
    KB. The effect of carbohydrate supplementation on multiple sessions and bouts of resistance
    exercise. J Strength Cond Res 13:111-117, 1999.
17. Haff, GG, Stone, MH, Warren, BJ, Keith, R, Johnson, RL, Nieman, DC, Williams, F, and Kirksey,
    KB. The effect of carbohydrate supplementation on multiple sessions and bouts of resistance
    exercise. J Strength Cond Res 13:111-117, 1999.
18. Haffner, SM, D’Agostino, R, Saad, MF, Rewers, M, Mykkanen, L, Selby, J, Howard, G, Savage, PJ,
    Hamman, RF, Wegenknecht, LE, and Bergman, RN. Increased insulin resistance and insulin
    secretion in nondiabetic African Americans and Hispanics compared with non-Hispanic whites: the
    insulin resistance atherosclerosis atudy. Diabetes 45:742-748, 1996.
19. Halliday, TM, Loenneke, JP, and Davy, BM. Dietary intake, body composition, and menstrual cycle
    changes during competition preparation and recovery in a drug-free figure competitor: a case study.
    Nutrients 8:740, 2016.
20. Hammad, S, Pu, S, and Jones, PJ. Current evidence supporting the link between dietary fatty acids
    and cardiovascular disease. Lipids 51:507-517, 2016.
21. Helms, ER, Aragon, AA, and Fitschen, PJ. Evidence-based recommendations for natural
    bodybuilding contest preparation: nutrition and supplementation. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:20, 2014.
22. Hickson, JF, Jr., Johnson, TE, Lee, W, and Sidor, RJ. Nutrition and the precontest preparations of a
    male bodybuilder. J Am Diet Assoc 90:264-267, 1990.
23. Jeukendrup, AE, Wagenmakers, AJ, Stegen, JH, Gijsen, AP, Brouns, F, and Saris, WH.
    Carbohydrate ingestion can completely suppress endogenous glucose production during exercise.
    Am J Physiol 276:E672-E683, 1999.
24. Kistler, BM, Fitschen, PJ, Ranadive, SM, Fernhall, B, and Wilund, KR. Case study: natural
    bodybuilding contest preparation. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 24:694-700, 2014.
25. Kleiner, SM, Bazzarre, TL, and Litchford, MD. Metabolic profiles, diet, and health practices of
    championship male and female bodybuilders. J Am Diet Assoc 90:962-967, 1990.
26. Lamar-Hildebrand, N, Saldanha, L, and Endres, J. Dietary and exercise practices of college-aged
    female bodybuilders. J Am Diet Assoc 89:1308-1310, 1989.
27. Leaf, A and Antonio, J. The effects of overfeeding on body composition: the role of macronutrient
    composition: a narrative review. Int J Exerc Sci 10:1275-1296, 2017.
28. Lichtman, SW, Pisarska, K, Berman, ER, Pestone, M, Dowling, H, Offenbacher, E, Weisel, H,
    Heshka, S, Matthews, DE, and Heymsfield, SB. Discrepancy between self-reported and actual
    caloric intake and exercise in obese subjects. N Engl J Med 327:1893-1898, 1992.
29. Macdiarmid, J and Blundell, J. Assessing dietary intake: who, what and why of under-reporting.
    Nutr Res Rev 11:231-253, 1998.
30. Maclean, PS, Bergouignan, A, Cornier, MA, and Jackman, MR. Biology’s response to dieting: the
    impetus for weight regain. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 301:R581-600, 2011.
31. Magnuson, BA, Burdock, GA, Doull, J, Kroes, RM, Marsh, GM, Pariza, MW, Spencer, PS,
    Waddell, WJ, Walker, R, and Williams, GM. Aspartame: a safety evaluation based on current use
    levels, regulations, and toxicological and epidemiological studies. Crit Rev Toxicol 37:629-727,
    2007.
32. Mozaffarian, D, Micha, R, and Wallace, S. Effects on coronary heart disease of increasing
    polyunsaturated fat in place of saturated fat: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
    controlled trials. PLoS Med 7:e1000252, 2010.
33. Phillips, SM. A brief review of critical processes in exercise-induced muscular hypertrophy. Sports
    Med 44 Suppl 1:S71-77, 2014.
34. Res, PT, Groen, B, Pennings, B, Beelen, M, Wallis, GA, Gijsen, AP, Senden, JM, and LJ, VANL.
    Protein ingestion before sleep improves postexercise overnight recovery. Med Sci Sports Exerc
    44:1560-1569, 2012.
35. Robergs, RA, Pearson, DR, Costill, DL, Fink, WJ, Pascoe, DD, Benedict, MA, Lambert, CP, and
    Zachweija, JJ. Muscle glycogenolysis during differing intensities of weight-resistance exercise. J
    Appl Physiol (1985) 70:1700-1706, 1991.
36. Robinson, SL, Lambeth-Mansell, A, Gillibrand, G, Smith-Ryan, A, and Bannock, L. A nutrition and
    conditioning intervention for natural bodybuilding contest preparation: case study. J Int Soc Sports
    Nutr 12:20, 2015.
37. Rogers, PJ, Hogenkamp, PS, de Graaf, C, Higgs, S, Lluch, A, Ness, AR, Penfold, C, Perry, R, Putz,
    P, Yeomans, MR, and Mela, DJ. Does low-energy sweetener consumption affect energy intake and
    body weight? A systematic review, including meta-analyses, of the evidence from human and
    animal studies. Int J Obes (Lond) 40:381-394, 2016.
38. Romon, M, Lebel, P, Velly, C, Marecaux, N, Fruchart, JC, and Dallongeville, J. Leptin response to
    carbohydrate or fat meal and association with subsequent satiety and energy intake. Am J Physiol
    277:E855-861, 1999.
39. Rossow, LM, Fukuda, DH, Fahs, CA, Loenneke, JP, and Stout, JR. Natural bodybuilding
    competition preparation and recovery: a 12-month case study. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 8:582-
    592, 2013.
40. Sandoval, WM, Heyward, VH, and Lyons, TM. Comparison of body composition, exercise and
    nutritional profiles of female and male body builders at competition. J Sports Med Phys Fitness
    29:63-70, 1989.
41. Schoenfeld, BJ, Aragon, AA, and Krieger, JW. The effect of protein timing on muscle strength and
    hypertrophy: a meta-analysis. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 10:53, 2013.
42. Seimon, RV, Roekenes, JA, Zibellini, J, Zhu, B, Gibson, AA, Hills, AP, Wood, RE, King, NA,
    Byrne, NM, and Sainsbury, A. Do intermittent diets provide physiological benefits over continuous
    diets for weight loss? A systematic review of clinical trials. Mol Cell Endocrinol 418 Pt 2:153-172,
    2015.
43. Siri-Tarino, PW, Sun, Q, Hu, FB, and Krauss, RM. Meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies
    evaluating the association of saturated fat with cardiovascular disease. Am J Clin Nutr 91:535-546,
    2010.
44. Smith, CF, Williamson, DA, Bray, GA, and Ryan, DH. Flexible vs. rigid dieting strategies:
    relationship with adverse behavioral outcomes. Appetite 32:295-305, 1999.
45. Sofer, S, Eliraz, A, Kaplan, S, Voet, H, Fink, G, Kima, T, and Madar, Z. Greater weight loss and
    hormonal changes after 6 months diet with carbohydrates eaten mostly at dinner. Obesity (Silver
    Spring) 19:2006-2014, 2011.
46. Spaeth, AM, Dinges, DF, and Goel, N. Resting metabolic rate varies by race and by sleep duration.
    Obesity (Silver Spring) 23:2349-2356, 2015.
47. Steen, SN. Precontest strategies of a male bodybuilder. Int J Sport Nutr 1:69-78, 1991.
48. Thomas, DM, Martin, CK, Lettieri, S, Bredlau, C, Kaiser, K, Church, T, Bouchard, C, and
    Heymsfield, SB. Can a weight loss of one pound a week be achieved with a 3,500-kcal deficit?
     Commentary on a commonly accepted rule. Int J Obes (Lond) 37:1611-1613, 2013.
49. Trexler, ET, Smith-Ryan, AE, and Norton, LE. Metabolic adaptation to weight loss: implications for
    the athlete. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:7, 2014.
50. van Marken Lichtenbelt, WD, Hartgens, F, Vollaard, NB, Ebbing, S, and Kuipers, H. Body
    composition changes in bodybuilders: a method comparison. Med Sci Sports Exerc 36:490-497,
    2004.
51. Varady, KA. Intermittent versus daily calorie restriction: which diet regimen is more effective for
    weight loss? Obes Rev 12:e593-e601, 2011.
52. Weigle, DS, Breen, PA, Matthys, CC, Callahan, HS, Meeuws, KE, Burden, VR, and Purnell, JQ. A
    high-protein diet induces sustained reductions in appetite, ad libitum caloric intake, and body weight
    despite compensatory changes in diurnal plasma leptin and ghrelin concentrations. Am J Clin Nutr
    82:41-48, 2005.
53. Wing, RR and Jeffery, RW. Prescribed “breaks” as a means to disrupt weight control efforts. Obes
    Res 11:287-291, 2003.



CHAPTER 7
1.   Amirthalingam, T, Mavros, Y, Wilson, GC, Clarke, JL, Mitchell, L, and Hackett, DA. Effects of a
     modified German volume training program on muscular hypertrophy and strength. J Strength Cond
     Res 31:3109-3119, 2017.
2.   Bartholomew, JB, Stults-Kolehmainen, MA, Elrod, CC, and Todd, JS. Strength gains after
     resistance training: the effect of stressful, negative life events. J Strength Cond Res 22:1215-1221,
     2008.
3.   Bravata, DM, Smith-Spangler, C, Sundaram, V, Gienger, AL, Lin, N, Lewis, R, Stave, CD, Olkin, I,
     and Sirard, JR. Using pedometers to increase physical activity and improve health: a systematic
     review. JAMA 298:2296-2304, 2007.
4.   Campos, GE, Luecke, TJ, Wendeln, HK, Toma, K, Hagerman, FC, Murray, TF, Ragg, KE,
     Ratamess, NA, Kraemer, WJ, and Staron, RS. Muscular adaptations in response to three different
     resistance-training regimens: specificity of repetition maximum training zones. Eur J Appl Physiol
     88:50-60, 2002.
5.   Coffey, VG and Hawley, JA. Concurrent exercise training: do opposites distract? J Physiol
     595:2883-2896, 2016.
6.   Davies, T, Orr, R, Halaki, M, and Hackett, D. Effect of training leading to repetition failure on
     muscular strength: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 46:487-502, 2015.
7.   de Lacerda, LT, Costa, HCM, Diniz, RCR, Lima, FV, Andrade, AGP, Tourino, FD, Bemben, MG,
     and Chagas, MH. Variations in repetition duration and repetition numbers influences muscular
     activation and blood lactate response in protocols equalized by time under tension. J Strength Cond
     Res, 2015. [e-pub ahead of print].
8.   Fonseca, RM, Roschel, H, Tricoli, V, de Souza, EO, Wilson, JM, Laurentino, GC, Aihara, AY, de
     Souza Leao, AR, and Ugrinowitsch, C. Changes in exercises are more effective than in loading
     schemes to improve muscle strength. J Strength Cond Res 28:3085-3092, 2014.
9.   Fry, AC and Kraemer, WJ. Resistance exercise overtraining and overreaching. Neuroendocrine
     responses. Sports Med 23:106-129, 1997.
10. Headley, SA, Henry, K, Nindl, BC, Thompson, BA, Kraemer, WJ, and Jones, MT. Effects of lifting
    tempo on one repetition maximum and hormonal responses to a bench press protocol. J Strength
    Cond Res 25:406-413, 2011.
11. Henselmans, M and Schoenfeld, BJ. The effect of inter-set rest intervals on resistance exercise-
    induced muscle hypertrophy. Sports Med 44:1635-1643, 2014.
12. Kim, E, Dear, A, Ferguson, SL, Seo, D, and Bemben, MG. Effects of 4 weeks of traditional
    resistance training vs. superslow strength training on early phase adaptations in strength, flexibility,
    and aerobic capacity in college-aged women. J Strength Cond Res 25:3006-3013, 2011.
13. King, NA, Caudwell, P, Hopkins, M, Byrne, NM, Colley, R, Hills, AP, Stubbs, JR, and Blundell,
    JE. Metabolic and behavioral compensatory responses to exercise interventions: barriers to weight
    loss. Obesity (Silver Spring) 15:1373-1383, 2007.
14. Klemp, A, Dolan, C, Quiles, JM, Blanco, R, Zoeller, RF, Graves, BS, and Zourdos, MC. Volume-
    equated high- and low-repetition daily undulating programming strategies produce similar
    hypertrophy and strength adaptations. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 41:699-705, 2016.
15. Krieger, JW. Single vs. multiple sets of resistance exercise for muscle hypertrophy: a meta-analysis.
    J Strength Cond Res 24:1150-1159, 2010.
16. Larsson, ME, Kall, I, and Nilsson-Helander, K. Treatment of patellar tendinopathy: a systematic
    review of randomized controlled trials. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 20:1632-1646, 2012.
17. Levine, JA. Nonexercise activity thermogenesis: liberating the life-force. J Intern Med 262:273-287,
    2007.
18. Maclean, PS, Bergouignan, A, Cornier, MA, and Jackman, MR. Biology’s response to dieting: the
    impetus for weight regain. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 301:R581-600, 2011.
19. McMahon, GE, Morse, CI, Burden, A, Winwood, K, and Onambele, GL. Impact of range of motion
    during ecologically valid resistance training protocols on muscle size, subcutaneous fat, and
    strength. J Strength Cond Res 28:245-255, 2014.
20. Melanson, EL, Sharp, TA, Seagle, HM, Horton, TJ, Donahoo, WT, Grunwald, GK, Hamilton, JT,
    and Hill, JO. Effect of exercise intensity on 24-h energy expenditure and nutrient oxidation. J Appl
    Physiol (1985) 92:1045-1052, 2002.
21. Miller, BF, Olesen, JL, Hansen, M, Dossing, S, Crameri, RM, Welling, RJ, Langberg, H, Flyvbjerg,
    A, Kjaer, M, Babraj, JA, Smith, K, and Rennie, MJ. Coordinated collagen and muscle protein
    synthesis in human patella tendon and quadriceps muscle after exercise. J Physiol 567:1021-1033,
    2005.
22. Morton, RW, Oikawa, SY, Wavell, CG, Mazara, N, McGlory, C, Quadrilatero, J, Baechler, BL,
    Baker, SK, and Phillips, SM. Neither load nor systemic hormones determine resistance training-
    mediated hypertrophy or strength gains in resistance-trained young men. J Appl Physiol (1985)
    121:129-138, 2016.
23. Phillips, SM, Tipton, KD, Aarsland, A, Wolf, SE, and Wolfe, RR. Mixed muscle protein synthesis
    and breakdown after resistance exercise in humans. Am J Physiol 273:E99-107, 1997.
24. Pontzer, H, Durazo-Arvizu, R, Dugas, LR, Plange-Rhule, J, Bovet, P, Forrester, TE, Lambert, EV,
    Cooper, RS, Schoeller, DA, and Luke, A. Constrained total energy expenditure and metabolic
    adaptation to physical activity in adult humans. Curr Biol 26:410-417, 2016.
25. Robineau, J, Babault, N, Piscione, J, Lacome, M, and Bigard, AX. Specific training effects of
    concurrent aerobic and strength exercises depend on recovery duration. J Strength Cond Res 30:672-
    683, 2016.
26. Rossow, LM, Fukuda, DH, Fahs, CA, Loenneke, JP, and Stout, JR. Natural bodybuilding
    competition preparation and recovery: a 12-month case study. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 8:582-
    592, 2013.
27. Saris, WH and Schrauwen, P. Substrate oxidation differences between high- and low-intensity
    exercise are compensated over 24 hours in obese men. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 28:759-765,
    2004.
28. Schoenfeld, BJ, Aragon, AA, Wilborn, CD, Krieger, JW, and Sonmez, GT. Body composition
    changes associated with fasted versus non-fasted aerobic exercise. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:54,
    2014.
29. Schoenfeld, BJ, Contreras, B, Ogborn, D, Galpin, A, Krieger, J, and Sonmez, GT. Effects of varied
    versus constant loading zones on muscular adaptations in trained men. Int J Sports Med 37:442-447,
    2016.
30. Schoenfeld, BJ, Ogborn, D, and Krieger, JW. Dose-response relationship between weekly resistance
    training volume and increases in muscle mass: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sports
    Sci:1-10, 2016.
31. Schoenfeld, BJ, Ogborn, D, and Krieger, JW. Effects of resistance training frequency on measures
    of muscle hypertrophy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 46:1689-1697, 2016.
32. Schoenfeld, BJ, Peterson, MD, Ogborn, D, Contreras, B, and Sonmez, GT. Effects of low- versus
    high-load resistance training on muscle strength and hypertrophy in well-trained men. J Strength
    Cond Res 29:2954-2963, 2015.
33. Schoenfeld, BJ, Pope, ZK, Benik, FM, Hester, GM, Sellers, J, Nooner, JL, Schnaiter, JA, Bond-
    Williams, KE, Carter, AS, Ross, CL, Just, BL, Henselmans, M, and Krieger, JW. Longer interset
    rest periods enhance muscle strength and hypertrophy in resistance-trained men. J Strength Cond
    Res 30:1805-1812, 2016.
34. Schoenfeld, BJ, Ratamess, NA, Peterson, MD, Contreras, B, Tiryaki-Sonmez, G, and Alvar, BA.
    Effects of different volume-equated resistance training loading strategies on muscular adaptations in
    well-trained men. J Strength Cond Res 28:2909-2918, 2014.
35. Schoenfeld, BJ, Vigotsky, A, Contreras, B, Golden, S, Alto, A, Larson, R, Winkelman, N, and Paoli,
    A. Differential effects of attentional focus strategies during long-term resistance training. Eur J
    Sport Sci:1-8, 2018.
36. Shepstone, TN, Tang, JE, Dallaire, S, Schuenke, MD, Staron, RS, and Phillips, SM. Short-term
    high- vs. low-velocity isokinetic lengthening training results in greater hypertrophy of the elbow
    flexors in young men. J Appl Physiol (1985) 98:1768-1776, 2005.
37. Simao, R, de Salles, BF, Figueiredo, T, Dias, I, and Willardson, JM. Exercise order in resistance
    training. Sports Med 42:251-265, 2012.
38. Snyder, BJ and Leech, JR. Voluntary increase in latissimus dorsi muscle activity during the lat pull-
    down following expert instruction. J Strength Cond Res 23:2204-2209, 2009.
39. Stults-Kolehmainen, MA, Bartholomew, JB, and Sinha, R. Chronic psychological stress impairs
    recovery of muscular function and somatic sensations over a 96-hour period. J Strength Cond Res
    28:2007-2017, 2014.
40. Trexler, ET, Smith-Ryan, AE, and Norton, LE. Metabolic adaptation to weight loss: implications for
    the athlete. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:7, 2014.
41. Wernbom, M, Augustsson, J, and Thomee, R. The influence of frequency, intensity, volume, and
    mode of strength training on whole muscle cross-sectional area in humans. Sports Med 37:225-264,
    2007.
42. West, DW and Phillips, SM. Associations of exercise-induced hormone profiles and gains in
    strength and hypertrophy in a large cohort after resistance training. Eur J Appl Physiol 112:2693-
    2702, 2012.
43. Willardson, JM. The application of training to failure in periodized multiple-set resistance exercise
    programs. J Strength Cond Res 21:628-631, 2007.
44. Wilson, JM, Marin, PJ, Rhea, MR, Wilson, SM, Loenneke, JP, and Anderson, JC. Concurrent
    training: a meta-analysis examining interference of aerobic and resistance exercise. J Strength Cond
    Res 26:2293-2307, 2011.



CHAPTER 10
1.   Lote, C. Principles of Renal Physiology. 5th ed. New York: Springer, 12, 2012.
2.   McBride, JJ, Guest, MM, and Scott, EL. The storage of the major liver components: emphasizing
     the relationship of glycogen to water in the liver and hydration of glycogen. J Biol Chem 139:943-
     952, 1941.
3.   Olsson, KE and Saltin, B. Variation in total body water with muscle glycogen changes in man. Acta
     Physiol Scand 80:11-18, 1970.
4.   Roedde, S, MacDougall, JD, Sutton, JR, and Green, HJ. Supercompensation of muscle glycogen in
     trained and untrained subjects. Can J Appl Sport Sci 11:42-46, 1986.
5.   Toomey, CM, McCormack, WG, and Jakeman, P. The effect of hydration status on the
     measurement of lean tissue mass by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. Eur J Appl Physiol 117:567-
     574, 2017.



CHAPTER 12
1.   Dulloo, AG, Jacquet, J, and Girardier, L. Poststarvation hyperphagia and body fat overshooting in
     humans: a role for feedback signals from lean and fat tissues. Am J Clin Nutr 65:717-723, 1997.
2.   Dulloo, AG, Jacquet, J, and Montani, JP. How dieting makes some fatter: from a perspective of
     human body composition autoregulation. Proc Nutr Soc 71:379-389, 2012.
3.   Garthe, I, Raastad, T, Refsnes, PE, and Sundgot-Borgen, J. Effect of nutritional intervention on
     body composition and performance in elite athletes. Eur J Sport Sci 13:295-303, 2013.
4.   Halliday, TM, Loenneke, JP, and Davy, BM. Dietary intake, body composition, and menstrual cycle
     changes during competition preparation and recovery in a drug-free figure competitor: a case study.
     Nutrients 8:740, 2016.
5.   Maclean, PS, Bergouignan, A, Cornier, MA, and Jackman, MR. Biology’s response to dieting: the
     impetus for weight regain. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 301:R581-600, 2011.
6.   Rossow, LM, Fukuda, DH, Fahs, CA, Loenneke, JP, and Stout, JR. Natural bodybuilding
     competition preparation and recovery: a 12-month case study. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 8:582-
     592, 2013.
7.   Trexler, ET, Hirsch, KR, Campbell, BI, and Smith-Ryan, AE. Physiological changes following
     competition in male and female physique athletes: a pilot study. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
     27:458-466, 2017.
8.   Trexler, ET, Smith-Ryan, AE, and Norton, LE. Metabolic adaptation to weight loss: implications for
     the athlete. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:7, 2014.
INDEX

A
ab and thigh pose 114-115, 134-135, 158-159
age, and competition readiness 37
American Athletic Union (AAU) 3
American Natural Bodybuilding Federation (ANBF) 14
anabolic steroids 13
Arnold Classic competition 5
artificial sweeteners 64

B
back-load peaking protocol (glycogen supercompensation) 192-193
back-load peaking with cleanup day protocol 193-196
back or rear double biceps pose 110-111, 132-133, 156-157
back or rear lat spread pose 112-113
back pose 142-143, 164-165, 168-169
beginner class 31
beginners. See new competitors
bikini division 8, 28-29
cutting water 187
  posing 95
  training program 82, 84-88
bingeing 209
blood volume maximum overload program 82, 83-84
bodybuilding division (men)
  about 16-17
  poses 96-121
  posing 93
bodybuilding division (women)
  about 22-23
  poses 96-121
  posing 93
body fat, monitoring 69, 209-210
body fat overshooting 209
body weight, monitoring 68-69, 210-212
British Amateur Weightlifting Association 2
C
caffeine 199
calcium deficiencies 9
caloric intake determination 52-54, 58
carbohydrate
  example needs for men 59
  example needs for women 62
  and peaking 183-185
  racial differences in need 58-59
  recommended intake 57-58
  sources 57
  sugar intake 57
  timing 65-66
cardio workouts
  amount 71-72
  in early 2000s 9
  fasted 72
  intensity of 72
  peak week 197
  timing with resistance training 73
cheat days 66
check-in 202
classic physique division
  about 7, 18-19
  poses 122-137
  posing 94
clenbuterol 13
collegiate class 32
competitors meeting 203
conditioning 33
contest preparation
  bikini division training program 82, 84-88
  blood volume maximum overload program 82, 83-84
  deloading 80
  energy expenditure, increasing 71-74
  hair removal 174
  hair styling 176
  jewelry 174
  makeup 176
  misinformed approaches to 8-9
  multiple, within seasons 38, 207-208
  overreaching 80
  paperwork 176-177
  posing music 173-174
  posing practice 170-172, 173
  posing suit 174
  power block periodization program 81-82
  range between contest seasons 38
  resistance training 74-80
  shoes 174
  tanning 175
  travel and hotel 177
contest readiness
  experienced competitors 37-38
  financial planning 40
  injury management 39
  mindset for 38-39
  new competitors 35-36
  optimal metabolic capacity 39
  plan adherence 39-40
  psychological readiness 41
contest selection and timing
  about 43
  appropriate rate of fat loss 44-45
  longer prep time benefits 45-46
  multiple, within seasons 38, 207-208
  prep time determination 43-44, 47-48
  selection factors 43-44
contest weekend
  after the show 205-206
  day before the show 202-203
  show day bag items 203
  show day logistics 203-205
  show day physique management 198-200
crab most muscular 118-119

D
dairy 9
Dark As 175
debut class 31
deloading 80
dextrins 183
Dianabol 3
diet breaks 46, 67
diuretics, prescription 13
Dream Tan 175
Drug Free Athletes Coalition (DFAC) 14
drug testing 202

E
energy balance 51-52
energy expenditure, increasing 71-74
enjoyment 214
ephedra 13
extracellular fluid 185

F
fat, dietary
  example needs for men 59
  example needs for women 62
  racial differences in need 58-59
  recommended intake 56
  sources 55-56
favorite classic pose 136-137
fiber intake 62-63
figure division
  about 8, 26-27
  poses 160-169
  posing 95
financial and expense planning 40
flat, definition 181
front double biceps pose 102-103, 128-129, 150-151
front lat spread pose 104-105
front-load peaking protocol 190
front pose 138-139, 160-161, 166-167
front standing relaxed pose 96-97, 122-123, 144-145
fruit 9
full, definition 181

G
genetics 37
glycogen storage 46, 65, 181, 184, 185
glycogen supercompensation peaking strategies 184-185, 192-193
Great Competition 2
grooming 202
growth hormones 13

H
hair removal 174, 202
hair styling 176, 202
hands clasped most muscular 120-121
hands on hips most muscular 116-117
hands overhead abdominal pose 114-115, 134-135, 158-159
history of bodybuilding
  early 1900s 2
  early physique competitions 1-2
  golden era 4
  late 20th century 4-5
  mid-20th century 3
  new divisions 7-8
holding water, definition 181
hunger 209

I
individuals with special needs 32
injuries, management for contest readiness 39
insulin 13
International Bodybuilding Association (IBA) 5
International Federation of Bodybuilding and Fitness (IFBB) 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 12
International Natural Bodybuilding Association (INBA) 14
interstitial fluid 186-187
intracellular fluid 185

J
Jan Tana 175
jewelry 174
judging 204-205
junior class 31

L
lean, definition 181. See also stage-lean
leanness, achieving 45, 182
load look and peaking strategy choice 196

M
macronutrients 54-58
 baseline intake 180
 individual differences 58-62
Magazine of Physical Culture 1, 2
makeup 176
masters class 31
meal plans 60-61. See also nutrition
men’s divisions
 choosing 30
 classes within 30-32
 classic physique 7, 18-19
 men’s bodybuilding 16-17
 new divisions 7-8
 physique 7, 20-21
menstruation 208
metabolic adaptation 69
metabolic capacity 39
metabolic rate changes 208
mid-load peaking protocol 191
mind-muscle connection 76
mindset 38-39
mini cut 212
Mr. America competition 3
Mr. Olympia competition 2, 3, 4
Mr. Universe competition 2
Ms. Olympia competition 5
muscle glycogen 46, 65
muscle protein synthesis 64
muscle retention 45, 52
muscular definition 33
muscularity 33
muscular symmetry 33
music, posing 173-174

N
National Amateur Bodybuilding Association (NABBA) 3
National Gym Association (NGA) 5
National Physique Committee (NPC) 4, 7, 8, 12
new competitors
  attending a competition 36
  building a foundation 35-36
night show 205
nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT) 73-74
North American Natural Bodybuilding Federation (NANBF) 14
novice class 31
nutrition
  bingeing 209
  caloric intake 52-54
  carbohydrate timing 65-66
  cheat days 66
  diet breaks 46, 67
  in early 2000s 9
  energy balance 51-52
  fiber 62-63
  hunger 209
  macronutrient differences, individual 58-62
  macronutrients 54-58
  meal frequency 64
  plateaus 69-70
  progress monitoring 68-69
  protein timing 64-65
  refeed days 46, 66-67
  vitamins and minerals 63-64
O
off-season 209-212
open class 31
Organization of Competitive Bodybuilders (OCB) 14
overreaching 80
P
peak week
 back-load peaking protocol 192-193
 back-load peaking with cleanup day protocol 193-196
 carbohydrates 183-185
 cardio during 197
 confusion about 179-180
 in early 2000s 9
 front-load peaking protocol 190
 glycogen supercompensation peaking strategies 192-193
 load look and strategy choice 196
 mid-load peaking protocol 191
 objective nonstarters 182-183
 objectives 181-182
 peaking network 189
 physique management peaking strategies 189-192
 prerequisites 180-181
 rapid back-load peaking protocol 195-196
 show day physique management 198-200
 slow back-load peaking protocol 191-192
 sodium-potassium balance 187-188
 strategies 189-196
 terminology and definitions 181
 training plans 196-197
 water 185-187
performance-enhancing drugs
 drug testing 8
 and sanctions 11
 steroids 3, 4
physique division (men)
 about 7, 20-21
 poses 138-143
 posing 94
physique division (women)
 about 8, 24-25
 poses 144-159
 posing 94-95
physique management peaking strategies 189-192
poses
 bodybuilding division (men) 96-121
 bodybuilding division (women) 96-121
 classic physique division 122-137
 figure division 160-169
 physique division (men) 138-143
 physique division (women) 144-159
posing 91
 bikini (women) 95
 bodybuilding (men’s and women’s) 93
 classic physique (men) 94
 effective practice 170-172
 figure (women) 95
 music 173-174
 physique (men) 94
 physique (women) 94-95
 posing suit 174
  routines 170
  T-walks 170
postshow analysis 207
power block periodization program 81-82
prejudging 204-205
preparation time
  benefits of longer 45-46
  determination of 43-44, 47-48
professional class 32
Pro Tan 175
protein
  example needs for men 59
  example needs for women 62
  gender differences in need 58
  high-protein diets 56
  racial differences in need 58-59
  recommended intake 55
  sources 54
  timing 64-65, 66
psychological readiness 41, 212

R
rapid back-load peaking protocol 195-196
rate of fat loss 44-45, 47, 52, 53
rear standing relaxed pose 100-101, 126-127, 148-149
refeed days 46, 66-67
resistance training
  about 74-75
  exercise order 77
  exercise selection 75
  frequency 76, 77
  mind-muscle connection 76
  repetition range 77-78
  repetition tempo 78-79
  rest period length 78
  summary and additional factors 79-80
  training to failure 78
  volume 77
  workout length 79
ripped, definition 181

S
saccharides. See carbohydrate
salivary amylase 183
sanctions
  about 11
  drug-tested 12-14
  untested amateur 12
  untested professional 12
saunas 172
shoes 174
show day
  after the show 205-206
  day before the show 202-203
  logistics 203-205
  physique management 198-200
  show-day bag items 203
shredded, definition 181
side chest pose 106-107, 130-131
side chest with leg extended pose 152-153
side pose 140-141, 162-163
side standing relaxed pose 98-99, 124-125, 146-147
side triceps pose 108-109
side triceps with leg extended pose 154-155
skin, thinning 183
slow back-load peaking protocol 191-192
sodium-potassium balance 180, 181, 187-188
spilled (spilled over), definition 181
stage-lean 208-209
stage preparation 204
steroids 3, 5, 13
strength, monitoring 69
stress 46
strongman events 1
structural symmetry 33
submasters class 31
success and failure 213-214

T
tanning 175, 202
teen class 30
testosterone 13, 208
thyroid hormones 13
tight, definition 181
tracking nutrition 53-54
transformation class 32
travel and hotel 177
V
vascular, definition 181
vascularity 182, 199
vitamin D deficiencies 9
vitamins and minerals 63-64

W
water, peak week 180, 181, 183, 185-187
water retention 182
weightlifting 1, 2
women in bodybuilding
 caloric intake determination 58
 macronutrient needs 62
 menstruation abnormalities 208
 in mid-twentieth century 3
 Ms. Olympia competition 5
 21st-century changes 8
 weight fluctuations and menstruation 68
women’s divisions
 bikini 8, 28-29
 bodybuilding 22-23
 choosing 30
 classes within 30-32
 figure 8, 26-27
 physique 8, 24-25
World Natural Bodybuilding Federation (WNBF) 5, 14
World Physique Alliance (WPA) 14
ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Peter J. Fitschen, PhD, CSCS, is the owner of FITbody and Physique, where
he works full time as a contest prep coach. His combination of education and
experience are unique in the sport of bodybuilding. He has a PhD in nutritional
sciences from the University of Illinois, a master’s degree in biology with a
physiology concentration, and a bachelor’s degree in biochemistry from the
University of Wisconsin at La Crosse. As a researcher, Fitschen has coauthored
18 peer-reviewed publications, including several directly related to bodybuilding
contest preparation. He is certified as a strength and conditioning specialist
(CSCS) through the National Strength and Conditioning Association. He has
been competing in natural bodybuilding since 2004 and won his natural pro card
in 2012.
Cliff Wilson is a professional natural bodybuilder and one of the top physique
coaches in the industry, having established himself through his work with
competitive bodybuilders and powerlifters. Using a combination of scientifically
proven methods and experience-driven techniques, Wilson’s clients have
amassed over 100 pro cards, more than 60 professional titles, and 9 world
championships. His reputation as a coach has also allowed him to become a
noted fitness author, with articles published in dozens of magazines and
websites. Wilson is also a noted guest speaker who has given lectures around the
world.
More Praise for Bodybuilding
“Having had years of experience in the area of bodybuilding competing, I know
that nothing comes close to the detail and passion presented in this book by Cliff
Wilson and Peter Fitschen. You need a winning team behind you, and here it is
—the platinum standard to prep.”
                                                                  Torre Washington
                                   Professional Bodybuilder and NASM-Certified Coach

“As a drug-free professional bodybuilding world champion, there are very few
people I would trust to look over my contest prep; Cliff Wilson is one of those
people. Cliff is a trailblazer in the contest prep arena, with his atypical yet
scientifically valid and extremely effective methodologies. Bodybuilding: The
Complete Contest Preparation Handbook takes a deep dive into these
methodologies, thoroughly discussing the basics and the intricacies of all aspects
of a proper contest preparation. Whether you are a newbie or a veteran
competitor, this book is a must-read.”
                                                                         Doug Miller
                                           President and CEO of Core Nutritionals LLC

“If you are looking for a comprehensive and thorough manual on physique
competitions, look no further! From the attention to fine detail on what helps a
competitor perfect their physique to special considerations on the psychological
aspects of competing, this book has upmost value to any competitor, whether
you are a beginner or a pro. As a dietitian, I was highly impressed with the
attention to detail in both training and nutritional recommendations that followed
an evidence-based approach for optimizing health during a contest prep. I highly
recommend this resource to anyone who competes or wants to learn more about
dieting to enhance their physique.”
                                                          Lacey Dunn, RD, LD, CPT

“Having been in the contest prep industry for many years as a coach and
competitor, I often forget the types of questions first-time competitors may have.
I would recommend this comprehensive guide to anyone interested in
competing.”
                                                                      Adam Atkinson
                                           Contest Prep Coach for See You Later Leaner

“As a long-time competitor, bodybuilding pro, and contest prep coach, I can say
this is without a doubt the most up-to-date and extensive reference for
information on the bodybuilding preparation process that I’ve ever come across.
Cliff and Pete have really put together something special here, with a great
wealth of knowledge and immaculate attention to detail, all backed up by
modern science and research.”
                                                                       Corbin Pierson
                                                              Professional Bodybuilder

“Whenever people ask me for motivation or express doubt, I tell them, ‘your
body is capable of achieving far more than you think.’ With the help of Peter and
Cliff’s book, you will be amazed at your results.”
                                                                     Maurice Benton
                                                                           IFBB Pro

“Bodybuilding: The Complete Contest Preparation Handbook is a breath of
fresh air in an industry filled with outdated and misguided information. Cliff and
Peter have taken their years of research experience and time spent in the trenches
to bring you a blend of scientific principles of competition prep with the delicate
art of coaching that is required to bring your best look possible.”
                                                          Austin Current, BSc, CSCS
                                               IFBB Pro, Educator, and Physique Coach

“Bodybuilding is a noninstitutionalized sport that you can’t learn in high school
or a team organization. This book encompasses that practical foundation that
bodybuilders usually have to frustratingly learn on their own. Whether you are
starting your first prep or looking for the fine details that a professional needs,
this book covers it all with an easy-to-read, evidence-based approach.”
                                                                         Ryan Dorris
                                                              Pro Natural Bodybuilder
“Bodybuilding is a highly comprehensive book that covers every single aspect of
competition prep. From off-season to prep to show day to post show, Cliff and
Peter dive deep into it all, blending both an evidence-based approach and their
own practical coaching experience. The book is written in easy-to-understand
language while still providing full citations for all the applicable science in the
field.”
                                                                    Laurin Conlin, MS
         IFBB Bikini Pro and Research Associate at USF Physique Enhancement Laboratory

“This is easily the most comprehensive book on contest preparation I have ever
seen. I’ve been coaching for 12 years, and not only did I pick up new tools for
my toolbox, but it was great to review some things I may have forgotten. I
recommend this to anyone at any level of bodybuilding.”
                                                          Jason M. Theobald, AFPA
                            Owner of Scooby Prep and Co-owner of Nuethix Formulations

“Bodybuilding: The Complete Contest Preparation Handbook is really what the
title claims it is … COMPLETE. Being in this industry as a full-time coach,
promoter, judge, and natural pro bodybuilder for over five years, I have not seen
a book that covers the sport in this much detail. This is a MUST-HAVE for
anyone looking to compete—especially the novice competitor or someone
looking to learn more about the sport!”
                                                                      Matt Jackson
      Owner of MEAT (Make Everyday A Transformation) and IPE Pro Masters Bodybuilder

“If you’re new to bodybuilding or a seasoned veteran, this book is for you! It
gives you anything and everything you need to know about competing and the
mind-set involved with it!”
                                                                           Mike Pucci
                          Pro Natural Bodybuilder and Online Coach at Team Unique Prep

“Always work to find that middle ground, and never forget that we are not
defined by the way we look on show day; it is merely a snapshot of our lives as
competitors. In Bodybuilding, Cliff helps you understand every aspect of the
process and every look that comes with it.”
                                                                    Samaiyah Council
                                                 Pro Women’s Physique Hybrid Athlete

“If you’re a first-time competitor or a veteran to the sport, it will not matter—
everyone can learn from this book. And, if you want to get ahead of the game,
then I suggest Bodybuilding: The Complete Preparation Handbook. Learn the
right way of bodybuilding and learn how to approach it by responding to what
your body does naturally.”
                                                                          Ty Young
                                                           NPC Competitor and Coach

“Nobody knows the art of bodybuilding and competition prep quite like Cliff
Wilson and Peter Fitschen. Their many years of experience and evidence-based
methods have produced exceptional results, and this book is bursting with
quality information every coach and competitor should know. Whether you’re
looking to step up your physique or take your coaching to the next level, this
book is a must-read.”
                                                                Anna McManamey
                                         WBFF Bikini Pro and Competition Prep Coach

“Bodybuilding: The Complete Contest Preparation Handbook is truly an
invaluable tool for both bodybuilding coaches and athletes alike. It provides a
comprehensive and up-to-date look at both the evidence and practice of
bodybuilding as a whole, delving into each particular phase of a contest prep.
This book will give anybody who is reading it a complete basis and
understanding of the all of the major components that make up a successful prep
and a successful bodybuilder. I recommend it without hesitation.”
                                                                         Leanna Carr
                                  Natural Figure Pro and Performance and Fitness Coach

“I can say that without a doubt Cliff is one of the most well respected and
knowledgeable coaches within the bodybuilding industry today. Cliff’s success
is obviously not by accident, as he possesses the perfect mix of passion,
knowledge, experience, and an undeniable competitor’s edge, which is what
makes his resume so impressive. In the fitness industry, to find someone who is
so successful yet so humble is rare, and this is by far one of my favorite parts
about Cliff!”
                                                                        Sal Frisella
                                                             President of 1st Phorm

“Peter Fitschen and Cliff Wilson provide us with the most comprehensive
handbook for competitive physique athletes out there. This book is a potent ally
for athletes and coaches alike who want to maximize their contest preparation.”
                                                                 Valentin Tambosi
                                             Prep Coach and Pro Natural Bodybuilder
